[Amit Varma]: The seen and the unseen would not exist if not for serendipity.
[Amit Varma]: Five and a half years ago, I congratulated a friend on his podcast.
[Amit Varma]: The owner of the network he was with said, Hey, why don't you try podcasting?
[Amit Varma]: We started talking and the show was born.
[Amit Varma]: I've elaborated on the origin story in episode 202 58 of the show.
[Amit Varma]: The point is that it began because of a happy accident.
[Amit Varma]: And I was open to that happy accident happening.
[Amit Varma]: Since then, many episodes of the show have happened because I left space for serendipity.
[Amit Varma]: As my guest today would say, I met someone interesting at a gathering, or I picked up
[Amit Varma]: a book casually somewhere, or I entered a rabbit hole and found an interesting person
[Amit Varma]: waiting for me.
[Amit Varma]: Being an introvert who doesn't like to party, I don't quote serendipity as much as I would
[Amit Varma]: like to.
[Amit Varma]: But so much that is good in my life began as a happy accident.
[Amit Varma]: The friends I have, the books that shaped me, the ways in which I changed as a person.
[Amit Varma]: So even though I often like to be alone, I also try these days to leave a little space
[Amit Varma]: for these accidents to happen.
[Amit Varma]: John Lennon once said, life is what happens to you when you're busy making other plans.
[Amit Varma]: I say let it happen.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Abhijit Bhaluri, who started off living a conventional life, made a little
[Amit Varma]: space for serendipity, kept himself open to new experiences, and shifted neatly from a
[Amit Varma]: corporate career to the creator economy.
[Amit Varma]: Abhijit has written many books on his journey, the latest being Dreamers and Unicorns, and
[Amit Varma]: they all come as a culmination of a process.
[Amit Varma]: First he leaves himself open to experiences, then he learns from them and forms frameworks
[Amit Varma]: to understand them.
[Amit Varma]: After that, he applies those frameworks in other contexts to understand the world and
[Amit Varma]: his own self a little better.
[Amit Varma]: And finally, he teaches them to others, either in real or virtual classrooms or through books
[Amit Varma]: and videos.
[Amit Varma]: I found this process fascinating, and I loved hearing about Abhijit's journey.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to that though, a public service message.
[Amit Varma]: The 23rd cohort of the online course I teach, The Art of Clear Writing, is now open for
[Amit Varma]: registration.
[Amit Varma]: It's spread over four weekends, has much interaction, exercises with feedback, and culminates in
[Amit Varma]: a vibrant online community featuring students from the 22 cohorts before this.
[Amit Varma]: It costs Rs. 10,000 plus GST, or around $150.
[Amit Varma]: You can go to indiauncut.com slash clearwriting to register.
[Amit Varma]: And even if you're listening to this late, I conduct the course every month, so go to
[Amit Varma]: that link for more details, indiauncut.com slash clearwriting.
[Amit Varma]: Now, let's take a commercial break before we talk to Abhijit.
[Amit Varma]: All around us we hear about unicorns, and many of these unicorns create notional value
[Amit Varma]: in the world of bits and bytes.
[Amit Varma]: But the sponsor of today's episode is a giant company that creates real value in the world
[Amit Varma]: of atoms.
[Amit Varma]: KNST is an aluminium formwork company that was founded in 2014 and is today India's largest
[Amit Varma]: and the world's largest growing formwork company.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what is formwork?
[Amit Varma]: It's a building technology that makes construction more efficient, sustainable, and scalable.
[Amit Varma]: Until recently, Indian real estate had to outsource this tech to foreign companies at
[Amit Varma]: crazy prices.
[Amit Varma]: KNST changed the game with their state-of-the-art automated unit and the largest design team
[Amit Varma]: in the industry that uses virtual reality to make their customized aluminium products.
[Amit Varma]: They've had a massive impact that is unseen in two ways.
[Amit Varma]: One, of course, they make the building they are used for sturdier and more reliable.
[Amit Varma]: Two, they've brought value to the entire industry, and not just the industry, but also the environment
[Amit Varma]: as projects that use KNST use less wood and are friendlier to the natural world around
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: This shows that not only is sustainable development possible in these urbanizing times, but also
[Amit Varma]: that India can show the way in how it's done.
[Amit Varma]: Their slogan goes, Desh Mein Bana, Desh Ka Apna.
[Amit Varma]: And companies like this are the Atmanirbhar India I like.
[Amit Varma]: They're already multinational, by the way, building not just for this country, but for
[Amit Varma]: the world.
[Amit Varma]: To know more about KNST, check out knstaluform.com.
[Amit Varma]: The link will be at the bottom of the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: KNST.
[Amit Varma]: Technology, design, innovation, they all come together in KNST.
[Guest]: Avijit, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for having me here.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I really enjoyed reading your book and watching all your videos and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: because you are doing something so well in that, that I kind of aspire to and try to
[Amit Varma]: do myself, which is that you look at the world through broad frameworks, you've taken a step
[Amit Varma]: back, you know, most people, they're just involved in the everyday running of the world
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you've taken a step back and you're looking, you're getting meta, you're looking at first
[Amit Varma]: principles, you're applying them to everything that you see.
[Amit Varma]: It is not only in your field HR, which you're an expert in, but you can extrapolate any
[Amit Varma]: of them to a whole bunch of things like while reading your book, I was like, this is a thought
[Amit Varma]: I have had about that.
[Amit Varma]: And now I see it in this context.
[Amit Varma]: And all the dots are kind of joining.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm really looking forward to our conversation today.
[Amit Varma]: But the part of it that I'm looking forward to is really not about that, you know, these
[Amit Varma]: days, I love kind of getting into people's early lives and memories, their childhoods
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Because I think in this modern world, where we are always stuck in the immediate moment,
[Amit Varma]: and we take everything, every change for granted, I think we often forget how much our lives
[Amit Varma]: have changed, like I'm 48.
[Amit Varma]: And I look back on how I used to live in the 80s and 90s, and all of that, ki abhi toh
[Amit Varma]: we have all the music in the world available to us.
[Amit Varma]: Tab matlab you managed to get a mixtape together, which you wanted, it was such an achievement.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it was a way of wooing someone, in fact, making a mixtape for her, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you're giving a part of your soul, you know, so I love to sit with guests of my vintage
[Amit Varma]: or older, and just kind of talk about those times, not just in terms of a nostalgia for
[Amit Varma]: artifacts, ki cassette toh after all is an artifact, it's but, you know, a certain way
[Amit Varma]: of living also, kyuki unn deno kya tha, you don't have a smartphone, you don't have constant
[Amit Varma]: distractions, you're forced into me time, you're forced into a kind of therav and all
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you're forced to spend more time with yourself, you're forced to talk to people,
[Amit Varma]: you know, one of the happy, one of the joys of doing this podcast is that I can sit with
[Amit Varma]: people and I can talk to them and I can make a connection.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, too much of the time we are on our laptop, with this illusion that ki hum
[Amit Varma]: toh connected hai, humare toh itne dost hai, but you know, it's getting more and more disconnected
[Amit Varma]: from the real world.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about your childhood, you know, when were you born?
[Amit Varma]: Where were you born?
[Guest]: What were your early years like?
[Guest]: When I think of childhood, it's almost like a collage of memories, you know, my father
[Guest]: was in the railways, while I was born in Kolkata, but you know, I spent the first four or five
[Guest]: years of my life in many different places in southern India, because dad was part of
[Guest]: southern railways.
[Guest]: And by the time I was closer to, you know, four and a half, five, he got shifted to northern
[Guest]: railway and we started our life in the north.
[Guest]: So we first went to Bikaner, we stayed there.
[Guest]: I have a couple of snatches of memories from that.
[Guest]: From there, we went to Delhi, which is where I went to school first.
[Guest]: And then dad somewhere, you know, by the time I was in the fourth standard, he got transferred
[Guest]: to Jodhpur, which is where I, you know, spent about four years.
[Guest]: And I also met my future wife there, you know, so I was all of 10 and that's the so yeah,
[Guest]: no, I didn't start that early, but I met her there, then got back to Delhi again.
[Guest]: And Delhi was where while dad changed, you know, within northern railway and the board
[Guest]: and all of that and multiple times, but I was there in Delhi and grew up, school was
[Guest]: in Delhi, went to college and Sriram College of Commerce, did economics, and then went
[Guest]: to XLRI Jamshedpur, which is where I fell in love with the place and came back to Delhi
[Guest]: when I started working, I did a degree in law in the evening.
[Guest]: And well, then from there, it's been like in multiple cities, you know, so I was first
[Guest]: in Delhi, then I went to Kolkata, then I went to Jamshedpur, then I went from there to Ahmedabad,
[Guest]: from Ahmedabad to Mumbai, Mumbai to Malaysia, Malaysia to US, US to Gurgaon, Gurgaon to
[Guest]: now Bangalore and Bangalore has been home for past almost 12 years now.
[Amit Varma]: Did that early moving around, you know, in a sense, set you apart from the other people
[Amit Varma]: around you, because in that time, you don't have the internet, you don't have that exposure
[Amit Varma]: to the world.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, you're limited and you're shaped by geography, what is around you and your
[Amit Varma]: peers and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And I wonder for, you know, people whose parents are in the services or in the army, and they're
[Amit Varma]: moving around and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Would you say that in some ways that, you know, you look at the world a little differently
[Amit Varma]: and perhaps you realize that only in retrospect, obviously, but do you feel that had any part
[Amit Varma]: in how you kind of develop?
[Guest]: I certainly think that, you know, for me, I was a very deeply introverted kid, though
[Guest]: anybody who sees me today will cannot imagine that, but because of all this moving around
[Guest]: in different places in schools and, you know, localities, I was a person who found a lot
[Guest]: of friendship amongst books, not friends.
[Guest]: So I had very few friends till the time I was in class 11, 12.
[Guest]: And all my friends that you see, you know, are largely from the time either, you know,
[Guest]: one or two from the times in school, but most of them are college and beyond.
[Guest]: So when I think of friends, I really think of them more from, let's say, the time I started
[Guest]: doing my postgrad, you know, so that's where, so over time, I've developed deeper friendships.
[Guest]: The most people say that it's harder to make friends when you grow older.
[Guest]: My friend circle has sort of really grown much later.
[Guest]: My childhood was really, you know, spent in a lot of reading.
[Guest]: I read a lot of Bengali books first, and then I went on to reading the usual English literature,
[Guest]: you know, which is common, you know, the usual classics and everything.
[Guest]: I started discovering Hindi literature when I went into school, when I came back from
[Guest]: Jodhpur in class eight, when I started.
[Guest]: That's when I discovered Hindi literature and I, you know, spent, I think, eighth to
[Guest]: 10th was almost entirely only Hindi literature.
[Guest]: And then went on to, you know, the usual other stuff and that's how it was.
[Amit Varma]: So are you still trilingual as it were, like, my God, reading books in three languages is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, one of the things I often think is that on the one hand, I'm extremely lucky
[Amit Varma]: to live in a multilingual country, like so many people in Europe can just speak one language.
[Amit Varma]: And all of us can, you know, speak two or three comfortably and perhaps understand more
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So on one hand, there is that good luck, but on the other hand, I haven't made much of
[Amit Varma]: it because most of my engagement with the world will be in English, I'll be all my reading
[Amit Varma]: now is in English, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel that that's a loss, because when I interact with guests, for example, who might
[Amit Varma]: have grown up in Hindi medium, and I realized that their view of the world is also just
[Amit Varma]: enriched by the extra angles that they see, it is not that, you know, one view is better
[Amit Varma]: than the other or anything like that.
[Amit Varma]: But they've got an added layer.
[Amit Varma]: And I had an opportunity to get the added layer, but I don't have the added layer.
[Amit Varma]: And in some ways that constrains how I kind of look at the world.
[Amit Varma]: And in a similar sense, the sense that I get by looking at your career arc or reading your
[Amit Varma]: books or watching your videos is that while you have sort of operated at that higher level
[Amit Varma]: of ideas, you know, that has been kind of given flesh by you're actually interacting
[Amit Varma]: with people all the time speaking to people all the time, you know, there's this moving
[Amit Varma]: story in one of your talks or books, I forget what but you know, you were in a train once
[Amit Varma]: you were traveling from somewhere to somewhere and you know, you fall asleep and when you
[Amit Varma]: wake up, the train is at a station there is absolutely nobody there.
[Amit Varma]: It's a small mufasil thing where no one stops and you realize that the train must have broken
[Amit Varma]: down and maybe the next train will come tomorrow, you have no information, you have no idea
[Amit Varma]: what to do.
[Amit Varma]: You go out, you meet a sadhu outside, he invites you to sit with him and then you sit with
[Amit Varma]: him and you chat with him and you talk with him and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I found it such a charming and lovely story because to many of us, that sadhu would
[Amit Varma]: be unseen as it were, if you you know, look at the title of the show, the scene in the
[Amit Varma]: unseen.
[Amit Varma]: So you've engaged, but at the same time, you've taken a step back and thought and how much
[Amit Varma]: of that you know, what is the value of these kinds of engagements and what is the value
[Amit Varma]: therefore of being comfortable in these languages?
[Amit Varma]: Because these languages really in a sense exist in different worlds, right?
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, you almost have to code shift sometimes.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, tell me a little bit.
[Guest]: When you live in different cities, you know, one of the first things that happens is you
[Guest]: begin to interact with people when you step out of the place and many of these were perhaps
[Guest]: not deep friendships in my case, you know, but I think that I lived in two worlds.
[Guest]: If you look at what was seen was specifically the books that I was reading at that point
[Guest]: of time, I was a big fan of the radio, you know, because in our home, dad was very fond
[Guest]: of music.
[Guest]: My mother played Hawaiian guitar and classical Hawaiian guitar.
[Guest]: And that's where I picked up my own love for music.
[Guest]: So I used to sort of listen to a lot of it.
[Guest]: I would read a lot of books.
[Guest]: But I think the only conversations I would have would be with people that I would meet
[Guest]: on the streets.
[Guest]: And, you know, so if I would be sent to run an errand, then in which case I would stop
[Guest]: by and chat with the person who was the shopkeeper, some of the people who were there.
[Guest]: And that's where I, you know, actually I have been to more homes of strangers in some sense.
[Guest]: You know, then I have been to the homes of many friends for the simple reason that, you
[Guest]: know, somebody would say, come have a cup of tea and we continue our conversation and
[Guest]: chat with them.
[Guest]: And because I was really always a fairly quiet introverted kid, I listened a lot to those
[Guest]: conversations and that I think shaped my world view, you know, understanding how people across
[Guest]: different sectors, different strata, how they lived and worked.
[Guest]: I think that really shaped my world a lot in terms of what I thought the world was like,
[Guest]: you know, it was formed by that.
[Guest]: When you think about, you know, school and college friends, in many ways, when I look
[Guest]: at the school that I spent bulk of my time in, in Delhi, you know, most of the people
[Guest]: did come from varying backgrounds.
[Guest]: But since I didn't have too many friends in school, I didn't really get to experience
[Guest]: that world a lot and, you know, a handful of people.
[Guest]: So a lot of this happened through, you know, when I would go and talk to people for some
[Guest]: of the stuff that I was writing in school or college.
[Guest]: And when I traveled with my parents, conversations with strangers, you know, that I would have
[Guest]: in the train, those would be long drawn conversations.
[Guest]: And somewhere, I think my philosophy of living life without looking for a return on investment,
[Guest]: you know, no ROI kind of a thing, that just didn't happen because, you know, you were
[Guest]: traveling together for a while and you shared each other's world, you shared food with each
[Guest]: other.
[Guest]: So really, you know, for me, those conversations were really precious.
[Guest]: So the incident about the sadhu that you mentioned, wasn't one of those things where the train
[Guest]: broke down.
[Guest]: I used to sleep, you know, I was a really deep sleeper.
[Guest]: So I just slept off.
[Guest]: I didn't realize that everybody had left.
[Guest]: And so then I met this sadhu, as you mentioned, and I spent time on that completely abandoned
[Guest]: railway station.
[Guest]: You know, I think no trains stopped there, except for these goods trains and all that.
[Guest]: So I spent time chatting with this sadhu from the street and learned about his life, you
[Guest]: know, what made him become a sadhu.
[Guest]: And then, you know, when you are young, you're curious.
[Guest]: So you ask a lot of those questions that, why did you become a sadhu?
[Guest]: So how do you manage?
[Guest]: What happens when nobody gives you food to eat?
[Guest]: So you're right, somewhere it opens up a different world for you.
[Guest]: For example, when you look at sadhus, that is evidence of the fact that there's a very,
[Guest]: very large streak of generosity in people, because these guys, they don't work anywhere,
[Guest]: they don't have a source of income, so to say, yet they live.
[Guest]: And not just one or two.
[Guest]: I mean, there are thousands of people who do that.
[Guest]: So there is an element of, you know, generosity.
[Guest]: And this is something when I was back home chatting with my father, and I was explaining,
[Guest]: you know, the tremendous experience of spending time with this sadhu.
[Guest]: And this was my father's interpretation.
[Guest]: He was saying that, you know, that's beautiful, because this is evidence that there is optimism
[Guest]: in people, in the world, that you can share, you know, that people can give without any
[Guest]: expectation of return or some such thing.
[Guest]: And every, even though it's a momentary engagement, you still give to a stranger.
[Guest]: So I think it was those kind of things and travel, you know, into the smaller towns,
[Guest]: especially of Rajasthan.
[Guest]: It was really precious, because I got a chance to, you know, sometimes a car would break
[Guest]: down as it was quite common those days.
[Guest]: And you have some of the most fascinating experiences of your life, you know.
[Guest]: So I remember we were going through, you know, close to Pokhran.
[Guest]: That time, you know, the blast hadn't taken place, and it was a little further away from
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: And it was a very tiny place called Badariya Latti.
[Guest]: And so tiny that you probably, you know, you can't find it in a railway timetable.
[Guest]: And the car had broken down, there were a couple of us, my cousins and I, we were there,
[Guest]: my aunt, mother, father, uncles, all these guys were there.
[Guest]: We were traveling together and, you know, the driver said, there's absolutely nothing
[Guest]: here.
[Guest]: So we'll have to wait till sunrise and then wait for a car to come by and then get the
[Guest]: tyre fixed.
[Guest]: We were waiting there and, you know, there was a villager who was coming by, he was walking,
[Guest]: perhaps going back home.
[Guest]: And he stopped to ask, you know, what's wrong.
[Guest]: And then he said, you know, I can take one person along with the tyre to the next village
[Guest]: where there's a person who can fix it.
[Guest]: But then why don't all of you come and wait in my home?
[Guest]: So he went there, he sent his brother off, you know, on a bike and he sent it off.
[Guest]: So the driver went to get the tyre repaired.
[Guest]: We waited there and he said, would you like to have food?
[Guest]: And we said, no, no, no, we'll, you know, get back and then we'll have some.
[Guest]: So he said, no, no, you must have, you have come to my home for the first time.
[Guest]: So the first time you've been here and you must have a meal with us.
[Guest]: And we were waiting in the courtyard, there was, you know, the lady was perhaps inside
[Guest]: and she didn't come out, she was still in ghoonghat.
[Guest]: And he sort of put a set of plates in front of us and said, you'll have to share plates
[Guest]: because there was, you know, I think there were three or four plates.
[Guest]: So he did that and he said, I'll just be back, na bhi aaya.
[Guest]: And he disappeared for almost like two or three hours.
[Guest]: And we were really, you know, all kinds of emotions go through you that, you know, are
[Guest]: we in a safe place?
[Guest]: You know, what made this person do this?
[Guest]: Why are we here?
[Guest]: You know, has he sort of gone off with the driver?
[Guest]: And then how long is he going to take?
[Guest]: When is he going to be back?
[Guest]: He came back after three hours and he came back and he apologized profusely and said,
[Guest]: I had gone off to the village money lender because I didn't have money.
[Guest]: So I had to first borrow money, pick up the stuff and then bring it home to cook.
[Guest]: So I apologize for keeping you hungry.
[Guest]: And I was, this is an incident I will never in my life forget that, you know, somebody
[Guest]: takes a loan to feed a stranger.
[Guest]: So while the sadhus, you know, story is one story of hope and optimism and generosity.
[Guest]: But I think that when you look at the generosity of the stranger who I've never met subsequently,
[Guest]: who takes a loan, it's a different matter, you know, my parents sort of paid and all
[Guest]: that stuff.
[Guest]: But it's not about whether finally we paid for it or not.
[Guest]: But the point was this person took a loan to feed a stranger.
[Guest]: It can happen only, you know, in these places in India.
[Guest]: And I have so many of these incidents.
[Guest]: I grew up with the view of small town India.
[Guest]: Some of the places I don't have that much of an exposure to villages.
[Guest]: But when you travel, it gets you to, especially when you travel in a train, you get to have
[Guest]: the kind of conversations that you have.
[Guest]: So every time I think of, you know, the visual that comes to my mind when I hear your podcast,
[Guest]: that these 12-hour, 15-hour, 24-hour conversations are only possible in a train, you know, that
[Guest]: you are sharing a meal, you kind of, you know, you have a cup of tea, he or she shares a
[Guest]: story as you are getting off, you get a glass of water.
[Guest]: So it's a very meandering, slow life.
[Guest]: And because of my father being in the railways, we traveled quite a bit.
[Guest]: I was privy to that world.
[Amit Varma]: So much to think about here.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I had written an essay a while back, which I linked from the show notes talking
[Amit Varma]: about the relationship between form and content, where the point I was making is that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, if I was doing a five-minute interview podcast, I'd approach it completely differently.
[Amit Varma]: I won't even have to read your book.
[Amit Varma]: I could just, you know, ask you a couple of stock questions.
[Amit Varma]: If I'm doing a half an hour podcast, and maybe I have to read your book, but I don't have
[Amit Varma]: to read anything else.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't have to think around it.
[Amit Varma]: If I'm doing a four-hour podcast, it goes into a whole different territory, where I
[Amit Varma]: have to actually listen, where it's no longer about, you know, like one of the rules on
[Amit Varma]: my show is for me, there are no rules for the guests.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the guidelines I set myself is never interrupt, just listen, because too
[Amit Varma]: many of us in the real world, we like, as Stephen Covey said, we listen to respond,
[Amit Varma]: we don't listen to understand, right?
[Amit Varma]: So the ego is always involved in that act.
[Amit Varma]: And my point was that the form not only shapes the content, it shapes a person, because I'm
[Amit Varma]: sure I've become a better listener and more patient and more open because I'm doing this
[Amit Varma]: week after week after week.
[Amit Varma]: And what you just said is almost like an extension to that, taken off to an entire society, that
[Amit Varma]: you travel in trains, and you have these long expanses of time, and it's an age before smartphones
[Amit Varma]: and you're surrounded by strangers.
[Amit Varma]: So you talk to strangers and there is that curiosity and you talk about their lives and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And modern life in the way that I live it is simply not like that those opportunities
[Amit Varma]: are not there.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I do this podcast, so I have these conversations outside of this, it's not there.
[Amit Varma]: Outside of this, everything is instrumental.
[Amit Varma]: You get into an Uber, you go somewhere, if you travel, you fly by plane, you're not talking,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned somewhere else that you always make it a point to chat with the person sitting
[Amit Varma]: beside you on a plane.
[Amit Varma]: I don't do that.
[Amit Varma]: I'm in my shell, you know, that's kind of how it is.
[Amit Varma]: And like you said, I kind of grew up extremely introverted as well, where, you know, Sartre's
[Amit Varma]: saying of hell is other people, that that was absolutely how I thought about it.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something I kind of think about without being able to put it into practice,
[Amit Varma]: that we need to get out more, we need to meet people more, we need to talk more, we need
[Amit Varma]: to be more open, because I think a lot of the fractures that I see around me, like why
[Amit Varma]: is social media the most toxic fractured place?
[Amit Varma]: It is because people aren't face to face.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they aren't talking to another person, they are talking to some constructed idea
[Amit Varma]: of a person, and they are going down those lines.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what are sort of your thoughts on this then that it is not just a trivial
[Amit Varma]: detail that, okay, we had more time than we have less time now.
[Amit Varma]: But I think just the different rhythms of life have made us different human beings.
[Amit Varma]: They've made us different people, like, you know, one of my older guests Prem Panekar,
[Amit Varma]: not one of my older guests, a guest I had a while ago, I don't want to call him old.
[Amit Varma]: So I did a long episode with him, which beautiful episode where he really opened up.
[Amit Varma]: And there also, he shared an example of a similar act of kindness as you experienced
[Amit Varma]: in a rural place somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just thinking aloud here completely.
[Amit Varma]: But I wonder if you're more likely to see this in a smaller town and a rural place,
[Amit Varma]: because your sense of time, and again, you spoke, you've spoken how different generations
[Amit Varma]: view time differently.
[Amit Varma]: But even across spaces, it might be the case that people view time differently, because
[Amit Varma]: in a city, there are so many things you can do with your time.
[Amit Varma]: And it can get frenetic, which may be in a quiet rural area or a village, there aren't
[Amit Varma]: so many things you can do with your time.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, it becomes more meaningful when a stranger appears somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And that human contact kind of takes on another quality.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm kind of just thinking aloud, but what are your...
[Guest]: You know, I would say that when you look at the lives that we lead here now in the urban
[Guest]: areas, a lot of it is, you know, really like social media, Twitter.
[Guest]: The conversations are Twitter conversations, you know, 280 characters.
[Guest]: At best, you will ask a stranger, you know, where is this particular address?
[Guest]: Or, you know, how do I find this particular person or whatever?
[Guest]: It's a very transactional conversation with strangers.
[Guest]: I think the yardstick of, you know, the quality of life comes from the quality of conversations
[Guest]: you have with strangers, not just with people.
[Guest]: Whereas in many of these places, as I've traveled through, you know, rural India, small town
[Guest]: India, etc.
[Guest]: A lot of it has been with people who are strangers, but who have, in many ways, you know, opened
[Guest]: up their hearts when we have sat and traveled together for 24 hours.
[Guest]: The train breaks down somewhere.
[Guest]: And there's a, you know, accident somewhere ahead and you kind of, you know, you're stuck
[Guest]: in that compartment for another, you know, six, seven extra hours.
[Guest]: And all of it is because of, you know, those conversations that made it so memorable.
[Guest]: I think when you make space when you travel, so in my case, now, unfortunately, you know,
[Guest]: the number of times that I travel by train has almost dwindled to a zero.
[Guest]: The number of times that I travel by bus has, you know, diminished.
[Guest]: The result of that is your worldview becomes so homogenous.
[Guest]: You know, you are not meeting people from different societies, different cultures, different
[Guest]: social strata.
[Guest]: You're meeting all the people who speak the way you do, whose worldview is the same.
[Guest]: They work in the same kinds of places.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think there is a poverty of experiences that, you know, you are limited
[Guest]: by.
[Guest]: You have to structure it consciously and say that, I am going to meet people, you know,
[Guest]: who are different.
[Guest]: And the only way that happens is when you build in a space for serendipity, you know,
[Guest]: you try out different things without really thinking about this whole question, what's
[Guest]: the point of doing this?
[Guest]: I think a number of times we shut off our diverse experience because you ask this whole
[Guest]: question that, what's the point of doing this?
[Guest]: So when you think about this whole philosophy of living without looking for ROI in a conversation,
[Guest]: in a relationship, in going to a place, and taking a road which is not the shortest distance
[Guest]: most efficient, but perhaps more interesting.
[Guest]: So when you go to a city, I mean, there's one way to think about it is you can either
[Guest]: do those, you know, seven must-see places in so-and-so city.
[Guest]: The other could be to actually, you know, step into a shop and strike up a conversation
[Guest]: with somebody and very often starts with a transactional question that, you know, what
[Guest]: do I do about this, that, and the other.
[Guest]: I have seen that most of the times, you know, the strangers will start chatting with you
[Guest]: and tell you stuff which you will never find in a regular toolbox or whatever.
[Guest]: So you discover, really, to use the phrase that you use, you move from the seen to the
[Guest]: unseen when you are seeing it through others' eyes.
[Guest]: When you are looking at it from your eyes, you are constantly filtering.
[Guest]: You don't actually get to experience too much of something which is new because you see
[Guest]: something, you say, yeah, okay, I know what this is.
[Guest]: And if I had no exposure, let's say, to a setup like this, I would immediately, you
[Guest]: know, ask you 15 questions.
[Guest]: What do you do with that?
[Guest]: How does this work?
[Guest]: Why have you kept that?
[Guest]: So those are the questions I would have asked you.
[Guest]: But the moment I know what the place is, even if there is something new, there's a great
[Guest]: possibility that, you know, I will miss it because I have predetermined in my head, oh,
[Guest]: I know this.
[Guest]: So that's the curse of knowledge.
[Guest]: You stop listening and you kind of assume a certain level for the other person too.
[Guest]: And in that you lose out all the details and nuances.
[Guest]: Then you are really talking in broad strokes because I assume you know what I'm talking
[Amit Varma]: about.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is one of the things I talk to my writing students all the time about avoiding
[Amit Varma]: the curse of knowledge, that when you write something, you have a certain understanding
[Amit Varma]: of it.
[Amit Varma]: So you assume there's a certain baseline understanding the reader has as well.
[Amit Varma]: And you kind of take that for granted and you, I loved your phrase, poverty of experiences.
[Amit Varma]: And I think this plays out across two dimensions.
[Amit Varma]: One is, of course, the dimension you mentioned that you're not talking enough to people.
[Amit Varma]: So you're not seeing the world through their eyes.
[Amit Varma]: And that constricts us like, you know, I did an episode with the writer Amitabh Kumar recently.
[Amit Varma]: And he said one of the exercises he used to set himself as a young person was he would
[Amit Varma]: enter a room and when he would leave, he would ask himself, how much of the room can I remember?
[Amit Varma]: And the truth is, even the way our eyes take in information, we only actually notice a
[Amit Varma]: few things, but our brain fills in the rest, right, based on what we kind of expect to
[Amit Varma]: be there.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I think there was a cognitive science experiment, where, you know, a group of people
[Amit Varma]: were told, okay, here's a basketball game, you're going to watch a video of it, tell
[Amit Varma]: me how many times the ball bounces.
[Amit Varma]: And actually, what happened was that they managed to count how many times the ball bounces,
[Amit Varma]: but they didn't notice a gorilla.
[Amit Varma]: And because in the video, there was a gorilla walking from one end to the other, that's
[Amit Varma]: chilling around, but they're completely focused on the ball.
[Amit Varma]: So that's like the scene and the unseen, the unseen is a gorilla.
[Amit Varma]: And I think about this in the context of our everyday lives also, that I might be at a
[Amit Varma]: traffic signal in my car, and my windows are rolled up and the AC is on.
[Amit Varma]: Everything that's happening outside is unseen, there might be, you know, a beggar with his
[Amit Varma]: kids sitting on the pavement down below.
[Amit Varma]: And it's unseen.
[Amit Varma]: So I've trained myself to kind of not see that aspect of it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, one way of getting past this poverty of experiences, like you said, is just talk
[Amit Varma]: to people.
[Amit Varma]: Another way is by reading, by reading and showing that kind of interest in the world.
[Amit Varma]: Like a friend and I were discussing recently, and I don't know if you've noticed this in
[Amit Varma]: the many companies you worked in, or whether the thought has ever crossed your mind.
[Amit Varma]: And he's a CXO level person.
[Amit Varma]: So he said that, you know, when I go out for lunch or dinner with my fellow leadership
[Amit Varma]: guys who are all running the company, I don't know what to talk about.
[Amit Varma]: It's that same homogenous problem you mentioned, that they're all on that one track, and they'll
[Amit Varma]: talk about a basic set of cliched things, but he can't discuss books with them, he can't
[Amit Varma]: discuss movies with them.
[Amit Varma]: You know, all of that is kind of out of bounds.
[Amit Varma]: And for him, it was a lament that what is it with us, he asked me that, are we the freaks?
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, reading is a way of sort of getting past the poverty of experience, like
[Amit Varma]: we are born to live one life, but through reading, we can live the lives of others.
[Amit Varma]: And it's unlimited.
[Amit Varma]: And you've mentioned that reading was a big part of your growing up in all these languages,
[Amit Varma]: first Bangla, and then English and Hindi.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about, like, first, do you have any additional thought on people
[Amit Varma]: having constrained lives in terms of interests, like, you know, in terms of the things that
[Amit Varma]: they care about, and like, for example, just to stay on this track a moment before we get
[Amit Varma]: to the books, earlier, you used an interesting phrase, where you were speaking about the
[Amit Varma]: sadhu, and you said, I spoke to him a lot, because the young are curious, I had the curiosity
[Amit Varma]: of the young.
[Amit Varma]: And that's another thing I've noticed that, as we grow older, some of those things that
[Amit Varma]: we have as young people, we lose.
[Amit Varma]: And some of it is, of course, energy is the biggest thing.
[Amit Varma]: But that curiosity also, that, you know, you're always looking around and whatever, and at
[Amit Varma]: some point, you get jaded, and you lose that.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's a terrible, terrible thing.
[Amit Varma]: There are other good things about growing up, perhaps, but that's a terrible, terrible
[Amit Varma]: thing.
[Amit Varma]: So first, what's your sense of this, that do people just enter a lane and they become
[Amit Varma]: like really narrow in the way they look at the world?
[Amit Varma]: And two, then after that, if you have any thoughts on this, we can talk about the books
[Amit Varma]: you read.
[Guest]: You know, when, when you look at a couple of different things that I've observed that
[Guest]: I did my master's from XLRH in Sheikhpura, I went and studied there.
[Guest]: I did human resources.
[Guest]: Actually, it was called personnel management and industrial relations at that point of
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: Then that changed to HR.
[Guest]: Then it's now more contemporary term is talent management because the view of how we view
[Guest]: people not just as resources or things, but how do you view them as talent?
[Guest]: So that has changed.
[Guest]: One of the things that I think what made XLRH at that point of time when I studied there
[Guest]: was the way the entrance exam was structured.
[Guest]: You know, there was a lot of stuff, you had to write a little essay.
[Guest]: There was a lot of quantitative stuff, a lot of convergent thinking, deductive logic, etc.
[Guest]: But I think there was a place for, you know, we had people who had degrees in literature.
[Guest]: You had people who had degrees in philosophy, you know, people who had degrees in naval
[Guest]: architecture, very diverse group.
[Guest]: Today you see the entrance exam, 99% of the people in a class are homogenous.
[Guest]: There are people who've done, let's say, engineering somewhere and they've come in.
[Guest]: So I think when you look at, you know, bringing a lot of people who've been trained in convergent
[Guest]: thinking, because in science, there is only one answer, you know, that's the truth.
[Guest]: There's one truth.
[Guest]: There's one, we are talking about data.
[Guest]: There's one source of truth, whereas the arts lets you focus on insight.
[Guest]: It's not the data.
[Guest]: You can say that, you know, 30% people, you know, do this.
[Guest]: What does that really translate to?
[Guest]: So I think arts focuses on sensemaking a lot.
[Guest]: And when you talk to people who are different, who are very different from the world that
[Guest]: you've inhabited, you begin to see a number of things which, from your perch, you just
[Guest]: can't.
[Guest]: Yeah?
[Guest]: So it's like, you know, when you are in, let's say, you are the product of this convergent
[Guest]: thinking and you start working, your entire focus is efficiency, which is such a killer
[Guest]: that, you know, you're really trying to do.
[Guest]: So you always tell people, you know, today when you run workshops on storytelling, one
[Guest]: of the things that I notice people struggle with is when I'm talking to them about a story,
[Guest]: their first thought is, but, you know, my boss always says, don't waste time with stories.
[Guest]: Tell me what's the heart of the matter, the essence of it, the executive summary.
[Guest]: All of it has taught us not to go beyond a curated version of life.
[Guest]: So you don't really have an original point of view because you've not seen other dimensions.
[Guest]: If everybody has had the same meal, you know, it's the same two things that have been, which
[Guest]: is why families are very homogenous in many ways, though between siblings, you will find
[Guest]: great differences.
[Guest]: So when you sort of really look at that in organizations today, the survival process
[Guest]: is going to be about, you know, nurturing different people, the creative people, innovation,
[Guest]: all those things.
[Guest]: But the organization's cultures are not designed to make those things thrive because it's all
[Guest]: about, you know, a meeting is about efficiency.
[Guest]: You kind of put three items on the agenda.
[Guest]: There is no time to actually talk about, hey, but this is something that I heard in the
[Guest]: cafeteria.
[Guest]: We don't do that.
[Guest]: I've never seen an organization which they all do consumer research, yeah, because that's
[Guest]: where the money comes from.
[Guest]: But, you know, I think the real source of insight would come from doing employee research,
[Guest]: you know, and by that I don't mean, you know, employee engagement surveys, which are extremely
[Guest]: trivial and sort of fairly, you know, limited in their value.
[Guest]: But if you really start to study the people, you won't have to run seminars to educate
[Guest]: your leaders about how do millennials think or Gen Z.
[Guest]: First of all, these labels don't even apply to India.
[Guest]: That's a different matter.
[Guest]: But I'm just saying that you would form your own worldview when you speak to a cluster
[Guest]: of your people, not through task, but through relationships.
[Guest]: That I first get to know who you are as a human being, and then we can decide to engage
[Guest]: together.
[Guest]: You know, then I don't need to incentivize you by saying, if you did this task, you will
[Guest]: get this extra.
[Guest]: You know, so the whole process of incentives and the way we structure, you know, tasks
[Guest]: in an organization has become very, very convergent and therefore limiting and very sort of inefficient,
[Guest]: ironically, because the whole quest for efficiency has taken away the possibility of serendipity.
[Guest]: You will never discover anything because the whole point is you put a research, you know,
[Guest]: you put a research department there, you fund it and say, by when will you produce the patent?
[Guest]: You can't, then the person is really completing the task.
[Guest]: They are not really exploring, so you will not get something which is going to be amazing,
[Guest]: and therefore you will feel disappointed.
[Guest]: But guess who started the cycle?
[Guest]: So I think the opportunity for organizations is to really start building those kinds of
[Guest]: places where people can have unfiltered conversations because you build trust through unfiltered
[Guest]: conversations.
[Guest]: I can really tell you what I think and you listen without judgment and you tell me what
[Guest]: you think.
[Guest]: Again, I listen without judgment and that's where you kind of, even though your point
[Guest]: of view may be a polar opposite, but we still build respect for each other, which is what
[Guest]: happens in childhood because, you know, you say, he's like this, you know, yes, I understand
[Guest]: that, but you know what, he'll always say this.
[Guest]: You accept each other.
[Guest]: That process of acceptance diminishes because you're beginning to narrow down on the field
[Guest]: of efficiency, and so you kind of say that if I network with you, you know, which is
[Guest]: the air quotes I'm using, networking is always with an end goal in mind.
[Guest]: I network with you because it's going to, you know, benefit me somewhere, whether five
[Guest]: minutes later or five years later, it will benefit me.
[Guest]: When you build a relationship, you are in a far more giving mode because without giving,
[Guest]: you can't build a relationship.
[Guest]: As one of the guests on my podcast had said something really precious, he had said that,
[Guest]: you know, relationships are based on give and take.
[Guest]: What you first give, then take.
[Guest]: It comes first.
[Guest]: And I think that in many ways was an aha moment because it sort of tells you that, okay, this
[Guest]: is how people, you know, have lived in the past, which is why, you know, those people
[Guest]: with whom I've had those conversations spread over 20 hours, 30 hours, have been things
[Guest]: that have enriched my life.
[Guest]: It has led me to, you know, live a life which I have not experienced.
[Guest]: I've heard about people, movies, books, instances, which I have not been privy to.
[Guest]: And those are some of the things that, you know, have shaped me in terms of who I was.
[Guest]: It's not been so much with, you know, my colleagues, et cetera, until much later because, you know,
[Guest]: that was different.
[Guest]: Living in the hostel in Jamshedpur was a really very strong influence in my life because that's
[Guest]: a place where you meet people from all kinds of strata and you are, this is the two-year
[Guest]: train journey.
[Guest]: You have many, many conversations with them.
[Guest]: And so those are things which have, you know, shaped.
[Guest]: So I think, I would sort of say that I'm a product of the conversations more than what
[Guest]: I've read.
[Guest]: I'm a product of conversations.
[Amit Varma]: That's such a lovely phrase, a two-year train journey.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess then the thing to aspire to is a lifelong train journey.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about the books now.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what was reading like?
[Amit Varma]: And I'm also interested because three different languages, right?
[Amit Varma]: So what are you reading in Bangla?
[Amit Varma]: What are you reading in English?
[Amit Varma]: What are you reading in Hindi?
[Amit Varma]: What are the memorable books you remember from that time?
[Guest]: The very first book that I ever remember reading was, you know, a Russian book.
[Guest]: Those days Russian literature used to be fairly accessible because they were, I guess, cheap
[Guest]: and readily available.
[Guest]: And someone had gifted me this hardcover book with lots of drawings, you know, as very vivid.
[Guest]: It was a pink colored cover and this title was When Daddy Was a Little Boy.
[Guest]: So the story was about, you know, whoever's written their dad's childhood, you know, so
[Guest]: it was done through, I think it was illustrated by a kid because I, when I recall those drawings,
[Guest]: they were not, or maybe it was done by an adult, but it was meant to be like that.
[Guest]: That was the very first book I remember.
[Guest]: And stories about Russia, you know, so, you know, that was one thing.
[Guest]: In Bangla, simultaneously, it was, the very first book was Upendra Kishore Rai Choudhury,
[Guest]: Satyajit Ray's, you know, grandfather.
[Guest]: He wrote a book which was stories about a sparrow, Tuntu Dhirbhui.
[Guest]: So it was, you know, stories about a sparrow who does a number of different things.
[Guest]: So, and then from there, I think I read a lot through magazines, Bengali magazines like
[Guest]: Shuktara, you know, or for that matter, we used to get this literary magazine called
[Guest]: Desh, which is absolutely stunningly well edited and, you know, had all the writers
[Guest]: who I discovered, you know, in Bengali, were all people who wrote in Desh.
[Guest]: And there was Shandesh, the magazine that Satyajit Ray edited.
[Guest]: And I was, I used to sort of look at it more from the point of view of the illustrations
[Guest]: and kind of that was a big influence on the way that I got fascinated by, you know, illustrations,
[Guest]: the way Ray did it.
[Guest]: And I was a big fan of that, where I look at all the stories that he would write about,
[Guest]: you know, so I read those, the Feluda stories.
[Guest]: So that was big.
[Guest]: I also then started to read, you know, parallelly when I was reading Desh.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think there was a lot of, you know, children's literature, but I
[Guest]: also started, because Desh was available, I started reading a number of these novels,
[Guest]: perhaps a shade earlier than what I should have read, you know, if somebody had rationed
[Guest]: it out and structured it for me, I would have read.
[Guest]: And I read, you know, the story of this artist called Milan, who wrote about his life in
[Guest]: Paris.
[Guest]: He wrote about that.
[Guest]: Travelling abroad was like just something, jisko kahde hain, wo hasrat thi.
[Guest]: When you know that it's a dream which will never be fulfilled, so wo hasrat, khwaish
[Guest]: nahi thi, wo hasrat thi.
[Guest]: So that element of travel, etc., I lived vicariously because they used to carry a lot of things
[Guest]: about when people travel, they would write about those travelogues.
[Guest]: So that was one, but I, you know, would read all these novels that they would serialize.
[Guest]: So you know, even though we lived in Delhi, you know, when I was reading these, I could
[Guest]: sort of read, you know, Shri Shendu, Sunil Gangopadhyay, and Asha Poornadevi, and Navaneetha
[Guest]: Devsen, a number of people, you know, you read, there was poetry of, you know, different
[Guest]: poets, from the classical to the contemporary, you know, so you kind of got a chance to sample
[Guest]: a lot of it.
[Guest]: I was particularly, you know, fascinated by a number of Sunil Ganguly's, you know, writing.
[Guest]: He remained, and one of my regrets is I never actually got a chance to meet him.
[Guest]: I was supposed to do that.
[Guest]: I was in Kolkata two days before he passed away, and it never happened, you know, one
[Guest]: of the regrets I'll always lament forever.
[Guest]: But for me, that world was really this, you know, Tara Shankar, I read a lot of short
[Guest]: stories of Bonaparte.
[Guest]: I remember there were some six or seven volumes of his stories.
[Guest]: So I would sort of finish each one of them during the summer vacations when I would go
[Guest]: to Kolkata, and I would read it at my, you know, my grandparents' place, maternal grandparents
[Guest]: were there.
[Guest]: And I would read those.
[Guest]: I read Asha Poornadevi had written a sort of series, that was my one of the first exposure
[Guest]: to learning about the lives of women.
[Guest]: She used to write a lot from the woman protagonist point of view.
[Guest]: I read the usual Charu Chandra I read, and so those were some of the things that I would
[Guest]: say form bulk of my worldview when I was growing up.
[Guest]: I started reading the usual English books.
[Guest]: But when I moved to Jodhpur, when I went into Rajasthan, that's when I first realized that
[Guest]: I had not read much of Hindi literature.
[Guest]: And that's when we started getting Dharmyog, Saptahik Hindustan, Chandamama, Parag, Nandan
[Guest]: and a literary book, a literary magazine called Navneet.
[Guest]: And that's where I first read stories by Shivani or when I read many of the other people.
[Guest]: I discovered the poetry of various writers in Hindi.
[Guest]: I read a lot of Premchand, which I was very deeply moved by.
[Guest]: And I sort of did that and that carried on all the way till I think I was in class 8,
[Guest]: 9.
[Guest]: It was again, so I would say until perhaps class 4, it was entirely Bengali and then
[Guest]: that stream remained.
[Guest]: Then I layered on, you know, the Hindi literature at that point of time, somewhere Hindi literature
[Guest]: took a dip after I finished class 10, 11.
[Guest]: I think perhaps from college, I didn't, you know, read as much.
[Guest]: But I heard a lot of Hindi on radio.
[Guest]: So radio was a passion for me, you know.
[Guest]: So I started doing a little bit of work for All India Radio and, you know, as a kid, go
[Guest]: there and write little pieces which would be read out and feel really nice about it.
[Guest]: And then I started, you know, learning some of these shows on All India Radio, which gave
[Guest]: me an opportunity to hear the voices that I had grown up listening to, you know, Devki
[Guest]: Nandan Pandey, Melville DeMello, Shorojit Sengupta, Lothika Ratnam, you know, Varun
[Guest]: Haldar.
[Guest]: These were people I met in the newsroom.
[Guest]: I used to read the news for All India Radio at some point of time.
[Guest]: And then as I did that, then it opened up my interest in writing, media, drawing, all
[Guest]: of that started to come alive at that point of time.
[Guest]: So I, you know, edited a Hindi magazine when I was in school in 11th and 12th, an interschool
[Guest]: Hindi magazine.
[Guest]: And I would do interviews with musicians and write about that.
[Guest]: So it gave me a legitimate opportunity to go and, you know, listen to all these concerts.
[Guest]: So I heard a lot of, you know, some of the great, so one of the experiences was my spending
[Guest]: time with Pandit Ravi Shankar.
[Guest]: I went across, again, I just said that, you know, I'm writing for the school magazine.
[Guest]: And there were other, you know, people who were there from the regular, you know, big
[Guest]: newspapers, mainstream newspapers.
[Guest]: But he sort of, you know, at that point of time, he was going to perform at the Swami
[Guest]: Haridas Festival.
[Guest]: And he said that, you know, I'm going to rehearse, so if you don't mind, can we not do any interviews
[Guest]: today?
[Guest]: I just want to get into the mood for that performance.
[Guest]: And I had just finished reading his autobiography in Desh magazine in Bengali.
[Guest]: It was called Raga Oor Raga, I still remember it so distinctly.
[Guest]: And I had made clippings of that, the entire thing was stuck with a paper clip.
[Guest]: And I said, I'm sort of disappointed that you won't speak to us, but you just sign this
[Guest]: because it's something I'll treasure.
[Guest]: So he looked at it and said, where did you read this?
[Guest]: So I said, it's stuff that I've clipped, there are one or two episodes missing, but I think
[Guest]: it's the entire thing.
[Guest]: He says, come, come, let's do it.
[Guest]: I can't find a pen.
[Guest]: And he sort of went inside and he said, why don't you sit down, are you in a hurry?
[Guest]: So I said, no.
[Guest]: And who would be in a hurry if he was getting to spend time with Pandit Ravi Shankar?
[Guest]: And I sat down and we got chatting, he was playing, I kept listening, I was just completely
[Guest]: mesmerized by that.
[Guest]: And he kept talking in between and about his life and this and that.
[Guest]: And he talked about what is not there in the book and what he thought about music and has
[Guest]: a whole lot of things.
[Guest]: It's a bit of a blur, unfortunately, in my head, because I was just pinching myself and
[Guest]: saying, this has to be a dream, this is not real.
[Guest]: So this can't be happening to me.
[Guest]: And then he said that, why don't you come in, I'll introduce you to some more of my
[Guest]: friends, come over in the evening for the concert.
[Guest]: So I said, you know, we tried, but then there were no tickets available.
[Guest]: So he says, no, no, you come as my guest, meet me at the gate and then, you know, I'll
[Guest]: get you in.
[Guest]: So I was standing outside Mablankar Hall in Delhi, and then his car came in.
[Guest]: I was there, you know, an hour early and then his car came in.
[Guest]: And he just signaled to me and I sort of went and had the privilege of seeing Pandit Bheem
[Guest]: Sen Joshi and Kishori Amonkar ji, and again, if I thought, you know, in the morning, if
[Guest]: I was thinking, this can't be real, then I thought this must be heaven.
[Guest]: This is also hasrat, right?
[Guest]: Bilkul.
[Guest]: Yeh wo hasrat hai, kyunki kaun soch sakta hai ki aisa bhi ho sakta hai.
[Guest]: So I think it's serendipity.
[Guest]: It's you know, just going there, not with necessarily the idea of an interview and if
[Guest]: the interview didn't happen, you kind of say, okay, then what's the point?
[Guest]: And then what you get out of it, unfortunately, I didn't record it, there was only, you know,
[Guest]: in that camera, which I had, I borrowed my dad's camera, I didn't have time to check.
[Guest]: There was only two shots left.
[Guest]: So he had a student, you know, he told, I think his name was Kali Ghosh.
[Guest]: And I don't remember, maybe I could be wrong on this.
[Guest]: He said, why don't you click a photograph?
[Guest]: So he took two photographs and he said, oh, I'm sorry, I forgot to put on the flash.
[Guest]: So one photo was gone, the other photo I said, okay, you know what, even if I'm not there,
[Guest]: let me click this.
[Guest]: So I clicked a photo of his, which is I think the only photo that survived.
[Guest]: But while I don't have something to show, but the memory of that day that I spent with
[Guest]: him was just so incredible and I kind of think that life was so unstructured that there was
[Guest]: place for these moments of serendipity and days of serendipity, not just moments.
[Guest]: A day when he says that come sit down and so there is no end game that, you know, I'm
[Guest]: spending 15 minutes with you, I'm spending one hour with you, it's an open ended thing.
[Guest]: And then at some point of time, I remember I cycled down home because it was like really
[Guest]: close by.
[Guest]: I cycled down and I told my mother that I'm going to go off to this and he said, you haven't
[Guest]: had lunch?
[Guest]: I said, doesn't matter.
[Guest]: And I kind of took a bus, went across to Mavlankar and stood there, really hot sun and I waited
[Guest]: for him to come in, but what a reward.
[Guest]: So I think those were some of the things, as I said, that I'm a product of these experiences
[Guest]: and you know, all these things.
[Guest]: So these, the Hindi magazine, you know, got me in touch with many of these people who
[Guest]: were writers, whether it was, you know, Pandit Anand Shankar or whether it was Ustad Amjad
[Guest]: Ali Khan who I got an opportunity, again, similar kind of a thing to spend time and
[Guest]: get just a conversation that when did you learn music and, you know, the stock questions
[Guest]: that one is tempted to ask.
[Guest]: Those I think have been precious things which are unseen because, you know, it only resides
[Guest]: in my head and, you know, it's not on Instagram, it's not on this thing.
[Guest]: Today, I think I would put it on Instagram and share it with other people, but there
[Amit Varma]: was no such thing.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe if you did that, you would lose some of the charm in the moment instead of
[Guest]: being in the moment, you try to capture it.
[Guest]: Yeah, totally.
[Guest]: I so agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: What's the role music played in your life, played and plays?
[Guest]: A lot, you know, my father was, so I had this real funny contradiction.
[Guest]: My father couldn't sing at all or, you know, couldn't play any instrument, but had a very
[Guest]: deep understanding and love for classical music or music in general, I should say.
[Guest]: And you know, whenever we would go to Calcutta, you know, we would go to the HMV store and
[Guest]: pick up those 45 RPM EPs, then 78 RPM, you know, the other ones, mid range ones, and
[Guest]: the long playing records at 33 and 1 3rd RPM, where, you know, I still remember it was all
[Guest]: of it was entirely either Hindustani classical, there was some bhajans of Pandit D. V. Paluskar
[Guest]: and, you know, Kumar Gandhar, Bhimsen Joshi, there was so these were people we heard both
[Guest]: on All India Radio, as well as, you know, on these albums.
[Guest]: Much later, I think we got the very first time I remember getting a piece of Hindi music,
[Guest]: Bollywood music was not from the, you know, so I used to hear it entirely on the radio.
[Guest]: The very first one was Dev Anand's Hare Ram Hare Krishna, you know, when that was there.
[Guest]: And my dad was, he was quite quite experimental in his taste.
[Guest]: So he sort of heard it and he said, well, it's pretty interesting.
[Guest]: And my mother had always been very fond of SD Burman's music, she would listen to a lot
[Guest]: of his old compositions, which he and his wife Meera Dev Burman wrote, Meera and SD
[Guest]: put to music.
[Guest]: And that was, you know, another parallel sort of track which went in.
[Guest]: In the evening, when dad would come back from work, so it was always quarter to nine was
[Guest]: the news.
[Guest]: Nine o'clock was the quarter to nine was the Hindi news, nine o'clock was the English news.
[Guest]: And then we would switch to Hawa Mahal and listen to all these radio plays, which is
[Guest]: how I sort of became fascinated with the radio.
[Guest]: And as I was sort of looking at that, you know, then when that would finish, he would
[Guest]: sit down and listen to classical music, or jazz or Western classical on some of the days
[Guest]: when there were days when they would play that in the evening.
[Guest]: And I didn't like so much of the Indian classical music, I kind of never understood it.
[Guest]: And it was something that had to suffer because, you know, he would say, no, you have to listen
[Guest]: to it before you develop the taste for it.
[Guest]: And so I would suffer through that.
[Guest]: It was only when I went to Jodhpur, that I got a chance to, you know, listen to all the
[Guest]: greats of, you know, Indian classical music, that suddenly one fine day, I suppose, it's
[Guest]: like compound interest, you know, for a very long time, you know, if you say that you will
[Guest]: double one paisa every day, and then as compared to, let's say, a 10 million that I could give
[Guest]: you today, what if it's compounded for a month, you know, every day, it's that whole process,
[Guest]: I think in life, whether it's your skills, or your interest, or your knowledge, or whatever
[Guest]: it is, your worldview, it's a compounding process.
[Guest]: So you hear a certain amount of it before it either makes sense, or you like it, or
[Guest]: you dislike it, or, you know, you start to categorize it as good, bad.
[Guest]: But that listening to all that classical music, on the radio, and one of the things I wrote
[Guest]: about my website, the charm of Raghudesh, you know, so, you know, so he was playing,
[Guest]: it's in the morning, they would play Vande Mataram in those days, early morning, first
[Guest]: thing you would hear is that.
[Guest]: And one day, he says that, you know, today evening, we are going to a classical performance.
[Guest]: And I groaned, I said, Oh, my God, I mean, not again.
[Guest]: And then we were at somebody's place.
[Guest]: And you know, later on, I kind of discovered that this gentleman was Pandit Nikhil Banerjee.
[Guest]: He was staying at this friend of my father's, he used to come and stay in their house.
[Guest]: He was a very well known doctor, and he used to stay at that place.
[Guest]: And he said, you know, he's one of the greats.
[Guest]: So when he sat down to play, after dinner, he said, Kya sunna chayenge, he said that
[Guest]: in Bangla, Kishvanabhu.
[Guest]: And my father said, if I can make a request, can you play Raag Desh?
[Guest]: He said, of course.
[Guest]: And so he played.
[Guest]: And for the first time, my dad whispered, this morning, you heard Vande Mataram.
[Guest]: Can you see?
[Guest]: So when he's going to play this, he's going to be disguised, you know, but can you see?
[Guest]: And then at one point of time, it suddenly clicked.
[Guest]: And I kind of, and I really enjoyed that performance, because I kept on, you know, trying to find
[Guest]: those same notes in classical.
[Guest]: And for a very long time, that became the method by which I approached classical.
[Guest]: That was like, you know, you hear, and many of the composers those days, you know, Noshad
[Guest]: Saab, S.T.
[Guest]: Burman, many of them would use, you know, pure classical music and convert them into,
[Guest]: you know, more accessible film music.
[Guest]: And so that changed my relationship with, you know, the film music that I was listening,
[Guest]: because I would find the Raag in that film music and the film music in the Raag.
[Guest]: So it sort of, in that sense, blurred the lines between these.
[Guest]: So it was a lot of listening.
[Guest]: But I also think that the way I view music, what has changed, you know, those days music
[Guest]: was collective.
[Guest]: If you played music in one house, it was heard by everybody else and was considered to be
[Guest]: okay.
[Guest]: You know, so somebody likes to listen to Vivid Bharti.
[Guest]: Somebody likes to listen to classical music.
[Guest]: Somebody listens to bhajans in the morning.
[Guest]: Even now, if you go to Calcutta in the morning, you can hear all of that, you know, from various
[Guest]: houses and all.
[Guest]: That's what it was, it was very eclectic.
[Guest]: It was, so I, my exposure to Western music was only when I came back to Delhi in the
[Guest]: eighth standard, when I came back and joined the school, I found that there was a set of
[Guest]: people who were listening to, you know, groups like the Beatles, Rolling Stones and Pink
[Guest]: Floyd and all of that.
[Guest]: And we had a phenomenal guitarist in our class.
[Guest]: And so, you know, he used to play these songs and that's the first time I heard Dylan.
[Guest]: That's the first time I heard many of these people.
[Guest]: And so that opened up another particular stream, you know, for me.
[Guest]: And of course, All India Radio gave me an opportunity to learn from people who were
[Guest]: very accomplished people who would do these programs.
[Guest]: I would sit in, you know, in the studios and listen to these guys and talk about it.
[Guest]: So that was how I sort of picked up.
[Guest]: I'm not that well-versed.
[Guest]: I enjoy listening to Western classical, I enjoy listening to jazz and blues and all
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: But I think people who are my friends is the Indian classical rags, you know, so that's
[Guest]: how I describe.
[Guest]: And then, you know, in Bengali households, you listen to all those usual Bengali composers,
[Guest]: Ravindra Sangeet, of course, and then Nazrul Gaiti and Dijandralal and Rajinikanth, Atul
[Guest]: Prasad.
[Guest]: These couple of these people, you know, this was very much a part of the musical diet that
[Amit Varma]: I grew up with.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned, and by the way, I found when daddy was a little boy with a pink cover.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, the moment you said the name of the book, I thought of the cover as
[Amit Varma]: well because shared experiences, right?
[Amit Varma]: If you're growing up in that time, and there are Russian books all around and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so I remember that book as well.
[Amit Varma]: And I just straight away Googled it and I was like, Oh my God, it's like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a portal to my childhood.
[Amit Varma]: I have to get this book.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm interested in what you said, you know, that that point you made about shared experiences,
[Amit Varma]: that somebody plays a bit of music in the house, everybody's listening.
[Amit Varma]: And there are like, there's a larger theme that I see today, which has to do with the
[Amit Varma]: crumbling away of shared experiences, but the frame that I've been looking at it is
[Amit Varma]: really in terms of the dissipation of the mainstream everywhere, like in media you had,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you had a consensus on the truth, and on what news was and all of that in the
[Amit Varma]: 90s.
[Amit Varma]: And there's been a dissipation, there's been a decentralization.
[Amit Varma]: And a net net, I think it's a good thing, obviously, you still have to deal with things
[Amit Varma]: like fake news, and the fact that we are engaged in narrative battles all the time, there is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a more diffuse sense of what the truth is.
[Amit Varma]: But net net, it's a great thing, because anybody can get into it, we have the means of production,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And mainstream media is kind of dissipated.
[Amit Varma]: Similar thing has happened in music, similar thing in various other fields, some could
[Amit Varma]: argue similar thing with even nation states, where governments no longer have the same
[Amit Varma]: kind of absolute control that they once did over the people, because we are all connected
[Amit Varma]: by we are all empowered by technology, we are connected by the internet.
[Amit Varma]: We are, you know, almost by default, almost global citizens.
[Amit Varma]: And this dissipation is kind of everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: And on the one hand, there is this issue that those old shared experiences aren't there.
[Amit Varma]: Like, one illustration of this is that I spend a lot of time on YouTube.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point in time, I decided to understand the right wing fringe.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't want it to mess up my YouTube algorithm.
[Amit Varma]: So I opened an incognito window, and under another account I signed in, and then I started
[Amit Varma]: exploring these things there.
[Amit Varma]: And then after a few days, I noticed something interesting, I noticed that my two YouTubes,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, are completely different, there is zero overlap.
[Amit Varma]: One YouTube is just giving me one stream of content, the other one is just giving me another
[Amit Varma]: kind of content, and there is zero overlap.
[Amit Varma]: So you think of a 15 year old growing up today, that 15 year old enters one kind of universe,
[Amit Varma]: and then the algorithms push the same thing to him and homogenize him in one particular
[Amit Varma]: way, while his neighbor in the other house could be getting homogenized in another particular
[Amit Varma]: way.
[Amit Varma]: And these worlds aren't talking to each other.
[Amit Varma]: So that shared experience, where, you know, you could tell me about when daddy was a little
[Amit Varma]: boy and immediately I connect, right?
[Amit Varma]: You can talk about Oh, Beatles and Dylan and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And these are shared cultural sort of signposts for us that we can all connect.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that they sort of no longer exist, that everywhere, the mainstream has
[Amit Varma]: kind of dissipated and the old way of doing things no longer applies.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you've written at length in dreamers and unicorns and spoken about how
[Amit Varma]: this is especially true at the level of a company, which is a way that you look at a
[Amit Varma]: company that have been different phases.
[Amit Varma]: But now it's completely different.
[Amit Varma]: And there, in a sense, you also see that process of decentralization happening, you know, with
[Amit Varma]: the gig economy growing, you can work from anywhere, your work can be anywhere, you can
[Amit Varma]: get talent from anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So is this broadly something that you'd then agree with that?
[Amit Varma]: Yes, the mainstream is dissipating everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: And the deeper question then is that, what does it mean for us?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I can't figure out if it's a good thing or a bad thing that there are less shared
[Amit Varma]: experiences that, you know, so you, you know, when you say when daddy was a little boy and
[Amit Varma]: that pink cover comes into my head, it's a shared moment, it makes me smile, it creates
[Amit Varma]: a connection between us, right?
[Amit Varma]: As people.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And so I don't know what to make of this, that we are, on the one hand, our individuality
[Amit Varma]: can express itself better in many particular ways, I'm not forced into a shared experience
[Amit Varma]: I may not want.
[Amit Varma]: If somebody at home plays a bhajan in the morning, I don't have to listen to that I
[Amit Varma]: can listen to hip hop in my room, and no value judgment, they're completely separate things.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a good thing that we can all find our individual selves.
[Amit Varma]: But number one, are those really individual selves with algorithms sort of playing such
[Amit Varma]: a big role in shaping us?
[Amit Varma]: And number two, you know, don't shared experiences matter.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm kind of rambling, but I'm just thinking aloud, because you sparked off this thought
[Guest]: when you shared experiences do matter, because it gives us a chance to connect with people
[Guest]: at multiple levels.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, if you if you see, the game of Antakshari is so unique to India, because we've had a
[Guest]: shared experience of listening to the same songs on the radio, and then you know, whatever,
[Guest]: we've shared that kind of history.
[Guest]: Even now, when you listen to most of the songs that people sing, you know, many of them are
[Guest]: old songs.
[Guest]: Yeah, many of them just, you know, it's not to say that no new songs come in.
[Guest]: But you know, you'll find that beyond a point of time, you will see the number of shared
[Guest]: songs that come in drops dramatically from the time when music became an individual experience.
[Guest]: What I'm listening to in my headphone is not something you know, and you know, so it's
[Guest]: become and that fragmentation shows up in everything.
[Guest]: So what happens is, therefore, we begin to live in our own bubble and the algorithms
[Guest]: feed that bubble.
[Guest]: So it becomes that bubble becomes a cage at some point of time, you can't escape it.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Whereas when you are indulging in shared experiences, you are very often stumbling into worlds,
[Guest]: which you did not plan or you didn't know they existed.
[Guest]: And when you do that, that's really what gives you a shared moment with the other person.
[Guest]: You know, when I've traveled into places even today, you know, when I travel, I think that's
[Guest]: the habit that I've retained, that I will go in and, you know, just start chatting with
[Guest]: a stranger in a coffee shop somewhere.
[Guest]: And then, you know, sit down and then when somebody else comes in, and their friends
[Guest]: come back, and then you sort of become part of this.
[Guest]: And as you plan out for this unscheduled, unplanned travel, even when you go to a place,
[Guest]: so you might decide that you are going to spend five days in a particular city.
[Guest]: But if you actually come to a time where you spend a little bit of time of that, going
[Guest]: to places at odd times, you know, in odd places and places where others are hanging around,
[Guest]: who don't look like you, who potentially don't think like you, you will discover that city
[Guest]: in a manner which will be impossible to replicate through any other experience.
[Guest]: So I think when you look at that, every place has an underground culture, every place has
[Guest]: a sort of mainstream culture, a place has a culture for the elite few.
[Guest]: So the social strata gets replicated everywhere in music and art and cinema.
[Guest]: And when we live in a homogenous world, we are letting our algorithms decide what we
[Guest]: should and should not read.
[Guest]: Ironically, the group that fights most for individuality is the one which is most gauged
[Guest]: by the algorithm, yeah, because that's what you are consuming, that's what.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, so the other day I went in and watched a Tamil movie.
[Guest]: And consequently, now my Netflix feed is sort of loaded with Tamil recommendations, which
[Guest]: may be good, which may not be good.
[Guest]: And I kind of now think that, okay, what do I need to do, you know, to make sure that
[Guest]: I get a bigger variety.
[Guest]: So then I watch a Korean movie, if I do that, then it sort of gives me...
[Guest]: So then you have to always constantly battle, you know, the algorithm, the cage of the algorithm
[Guest]: that you do want to be part of, yeah.
[Guest]: So I am a big believer in shared experiences, because, you know, the other day we were discussing
[Guest]: that, you know, the client of mine, he was talking about the number of people who showed
[Guest]: up for something.
[Guest]: So this is the person working in a company outside of India, we were having this conversation
[Guest]: on Zoom.
[Guest]: And I simply said, and the fact that you laugh at this, and that guy smiled at this, and
[Guest]: I said, oh, my God, you know, and, you know, this is a shared experience, which is impossible
[Guest]: to have even within the family today.
[Guest]: Because experiences are not common, you don't listen to the same music, you know, most families
[Guest]: don't sit down and watch the same TV shows, or Netflix movies, or this, everybody has
[Guest]: their own account, you know.
[Guest]: So it's good for the algorithm, because then they get to know what is the parent's, you
[Guest]: know, choice of movies versus, let's say, the kid's choice of movies, etc.
[Guest]: But I think there is an element of human bonding, which is missed out.
[Guest]: You know, you watch something together, some you understand, some you don't understand,
[Guest]: some which is, you know, disturbing content, and, you know, so it's all of that, it's a
[Guest]: shared experience.
[Guest]: Today, it's a very sanitized, structured, cleaned up antiseptic experience, which is
[Guest]: given to you pre-packaged.
[Guest]: So yeah, and I think it's sort of become a part of our life today in so many ways.
[Guest]: Music has become fragmented, movies have become fragmented, food at home has become fragmented.
[Guest]: You know, it's just so many homes where there is no common mealtime, so there is no shared
[Guest]: conversation because one person eats in their room, another person eats at a different time
[Guest]: in their room, and some person is a vegetarian, somebody wants to try this out.
[Guest]: So great from the point of view of individuality, but terrible from the point of view of a shared
[Guest]: experience in one.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, those are some of the things I think are worth looking at because
[Guest]: shared experiences make you become generous towards people with whom you will never get
[Guest]: a return.
[Guest]: You know, whereas when you meet people who are homogenous, there is always this whole
[Guest]: thing of networking, as I said, you know, what will I get in return?
[Guest]: So I think the opportunity to live that life is diminishing very rapidly unless you hold
[Guest]: on to it.
[Guest]: So when you sort of, you know, if you really look at the number of people you have a conversation
[Guest]: with, how many of them are completely different from you?
[Guest]: How many of them have professions which you would strongly advise somebody not to pursue
[Guest]: for whatever reason?
[Guest]: How many of them are doing things which are fascinating?
[Guest]: How many of them are doing things which are dangerous?
[Guest]: How many of them are doing things which are terrible?
[Guest]: How much do you know about these elements?
[Guest]: Otherwise you are presenting the Instagram view of everybody.
[Guest]: This is the view I want you to see of me.
[Guest]: You are not really seeing the unfiltered.
[Guest]: You are not really seeing the unseen.
[Guest]: You just aren't.
[Guest]: So I think that's where I view the shift that has happened in the way that we consume media
[Guest]: and the way that we meet people.
[Guest]: That can only happen through relationships.
[Guest]: When you build a relationship, stage one is trust.
[Guest]: Without that, I'm going to tell you what I think you want to hear.
[Guest]: So I think it's only when you travel together, Sahyadri, it's only at that point of time
[Guest]: do you really start to discover a world where somebody says that, you know, which sometimes
[Guest]: makes you shocked and that's fine.
[Guest]: I mean, the whole world doesn't have to live by your values.
[Guest]: I mean, even though I may disagree with that, I may say this is so patriarchal, this is
[Guest]: so this or that, whatever it is, that person, how do you know your world view is better
[Guest]: than that?
[Guest]: There are hundreds of things in my world view, which, you know, five years later, I might
[Guest]: be embarrassed that I had this.
[Guest]: I do have plenty of things, you know, which I think, my God, I mean, there was just so
[Guest]: uninformed now that I know a little more, I've modified my views.
[Guest]: It's the same thing.
[Guest]: A person who's very different gives you a chance to challenge your own world view.
[Guest]: Now, you might say, why would I want to challenge my own world view?
[Amit Varma]: Then it's a different conversation altogether.
[Amit Varma]: No, I love your metaphor of antakshari in all of this, because that is like, that's
[Amit Varma]: such a perfect metaphor for the whole concept of shared experiences.
[Amit Varma]: So I have never been someone who takes part in antaksharis because I don't listen to much
[Amit Varma]: Bollywood music.
[Amit Varma]: But for the first time in my life, I think I've now appreciated it, that what a big deal
[Amit Varma]: it is.
[Amit Varma]: And what you said about music also strikes a chord, like there was this essay Ted Joya
[Amit Varma]: had written a while back, and he's got this fantastic newsletter on music, which I linked
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes, where he speaks about how old music is dominating so much today.
[Amit Varma]: And this has become a big problem for the music industry, because old music is vastly
[Amit Varma]: outselling new music, and what do new musicians do?
[Amit Varma]: And part of this is, of course, the sort of lack of imagination on the part of record
[Amit Varma]: labels.
[Amit Varma]: And part of it is, again, just, you know, the mainstream has, in a sense, dissipated.
[Amit Varma]: And in an earlier episode, one of my guests gave me this excellent illustration, I think
[Amit Varma]: Chuck Gopal did in the episode I did with him, about how form is shaping content when
[Amit Varma]: it comes to music also, because Spotify pays you after 30 seconds of hearing.
[Amit Varma]: So there are now musicians who are now optimising for 30 seconds, there's one Beatles cover
[Amit Varma]: band where every cover is 35 seconds or so.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, why give more, Spotify pays for 30 seconds.
[Amit Varma]: You know, similarly, a lot of new bands by record labels today are told that we don't
[Amit Varma]: care what the song is, or, you know, we don't care about any aspect of this, but give us
[Amit Varma]: a 15 second hook that can go on TikTok, so people can make videos with it.
[Amit Varma]: So your typical way of creation is that whatever else you do, you get that 15 second hook,
[Amit Varma]: and then you pay big influencers to do TikTok videos around that.
[Amit Varma]: And if it takes off, it takes off, and that becomes a, you know, a mode of discovery.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you earlier mentioned, you know, buying those long playing records from Calcutta
[Amit Varma]: when you went out there.
[Amit Varma]: And those are also such an example of how form is dictated what we listen to your earliest
[Amit Varma]: form of the LP at the turn of the 20th century can only hold three minutes, so you have the
[Amit Varma]: three minute song, then you have, you know, it evolves till you can hold about 40 minutes,
[Amit Varma]: by which time the three minute has become the radio standard.
[Amit Varma]: So there, therefore, it becomes a conventional form that, hey, if you want to hit song, it
[Amit Varma]: will take this much time, like this, the bridge will come here, this will come there, everything
[Amit Varma]: is a set formula.
[Amit Varma]: And it also cuts to beyond durations, for example, you know, 1920s, the first advanced
[Amit Varma]: microphones come.
[Amit Varma]: So now singers don't have to project anymore, because we can whisper into the microphone,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: And that changes everything.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, a lot of that is kind of happening around us today.
[Amit Varma]: And I find that interesting as well.
[Amit Varma]: But that's perhaps a bit of a digression.
[Amit Varma]: And as for individuality, you know, on the one hand, you want individuality.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, you have algorithms forcing you into these directions, where that
[Amit Varma]: opportunity for serendipity to come in, which you mentioned isn't there.
[Amit Varma]: Because if the first five things I watch on YouTube, are what then determines everything
[Amit Varma]: else, then there is no freewill, I'm just getting unless I physically search for something,
[Amit Varma]: yeah, I'm being forced onto a particular track.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of my friends, Vasant Dhar, who was on the show talking about AI a long
[Amit Varma]: time back, he keeps saying that what we need to do is we need an option to be able to shape
[Amit Varma]: the algorithm as well, you know, give us a bunch of algorithms, we'll choose.
[Amit Varma]: So if you if you just don't want to think you can take your default algorithm, but if
[Amit Varma]: you want to tweak it a little bit, you know, people like you and me should have the chance
[Amit Varma]: to do that 20% I want based on this and 25% based on this and 25% pure dumb luck, give
[Amit Varma]: me anything and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that would expand our bouquet of choices, but I don't know how kind of.
[Guest]: You know, one of the books that I've just finished reading, in fact, I'm talking to
[Guest]: the author on, you know, shortly on my show, Luke Burgess, he's written this very incredibly
[Guest]: original book called Wanting.
[Guest]: And it talks about mimetic desire.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You know, when I first saw the word mimetic, I had to look it up and say that, is it certain
[Guest]: it's to do with miming?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And the whole thesis that he has in this book is, if you are not conscious, you're likely
[Guest]: to not actually exercise individuality because you are sort of governed by what others are
[Guest]: doing through various kinds of models, road models, etc.
[Guest]: And a model is always designed to be replicated.
[Guest]: That's why it is a model by definition.
[Guest]: And there are lots of very interesting examples that, you know, when you think about the fact
[Guest]: that so many people during the pandemic got dogs, yeah, and that's sort of when I look
[Guest]: at the number of people who used to walk dogs and the number of my friends and people in
[Guest]: the neighborhood, etc., who got dogs.
[Guest]: And each of them perhaps are individual decisions.
[Guest]: You know, they've decided that, okay, you know, I want a dog.
[Guest]: And I'm, of course, a dog lover, but you will discover that, you know, there's this unspoken
[Guest]: wave which has told people that, well, this is something you should be doing.
[Guest]: You know, a certain cuisine becomes popular because, you know, five role models or five
[Guest]: people who are super popular post it on Insta with 10 million views.
[Guest]: And suddenly you say, oh my God, that's a restaurant I haven't eaten.
[Guest]: I must go and eat there because 10 million people have said it's amazing.
[Guest]: So I think a lot of our desire when we, you know, so that I think is in Dreamers and Unicorns
[Guest]: I talk about one of the big forces you have to really sort of look at is balancing polar
[Guest]: opposites.
[Guest]: You know, so you will see that paperbacks and e-books will coexist.
[Guest]: You will see that, you know, this whole thing of collaboration and competition will coexist.
[Guest]: It's a part of human nature.
[Guest]: So when organizations put their reward systems to reward the individual, and then they are
[Guest]: wondering, you know, why don't we do a workshop on team building, you know, take everybody
[Guest]: out to the hills and sort of do that, and they put them in a classroom.
[Guest]: It is not going to, you know, get them a chance to really build deep, meaningful relationships.
[Guest]: So how do you do that?
[Guest]: The only time to give them unstructured time, but the corporates are so enamored by efficiency,
[Guest]: this whole thing is, okay, what's the agenda?
[Guest]: We'll wake up at five o'clock, even if it is an activity, which is fun, you know, you
[Guest]: would say, okay, everybody has got to get up at six o'clock, five o'clock, and then,
[Guest]: you know, do yoga together, and then do this together.
[Guest]: And then so it's everything is super structured.
[Guest]: So when people are given unstructured time, the first thing that you experience is boredom.
[Guest]: Because your mind is not used to deciding stuff by itself.
[Guest]: Whereas, you know, when you look at the fact that most creativity comes when you're just
[Guest]: sort of lying down doing nothing.
[Guest]: And I can recollect when I think of, you know, drawing pictures from my childhood, so much
[Guest]: of it was just about just lying on the grass and looking at the sky, you know, literally
[Guest]: counting the stars.
[Guest]: I don't think I've done that in years now, yeah.
[Guest]: There was a point of time when we lived in Rajasthan, we used to sleep on the terrace.
[Guest]: And meant you experience the summer in its true form, you know, so, and you used to get
[Guest]: a little chilly in the early hours.
[Guest]: And this whole notion of it being super hot during the day, it gets cool, then it becomes
[Guest]: cold, then it becomes pleasant, and then hot again.
[Guest]: In one day, you experience this diversity of, you know, the feel on your skin, it's
[Guest]: so different.
[Guest]: Now, what happens is, everything is standardized, yeah.
[Guest]: So you will walk in from one, you know, your car into the office, and it's all standardized
[Guest]: temperature.
[Guest]: So even weather has become impersonal, you know, so it's what everybody else is experiencing.
[Guest]: Those are, I think, some of the things that shape people.
[Guest]: So I consciously, I try to, you know, look for people who have views very different from
[Guest]: mine.
[Guest]: And I remember one of them used to say that, on Twitter, for example, if you go around
[Guest]: and do a search on something, you know, like, I remember this very vividly, somebody had
[Guest]: recommended the name of a person and I typed the name wrong, you know, I misspelt it.
[Guest]: And it threw up a photographer who posts about fashion at funerals.
[Guest]: My first thought was, that's gross.
[Guest]: I mean, why are you photographing people when they are in their saddest moments about fashion?
[Guest]: And you know, and he's written a number of, you know, short little things, he says, look
[Guest]: at the fact that it's completely color coordinated.
[Guest]: Look at the fact that, you know, they've taken the trouble to sort of add that little frill
[Guest]: and this and that, and posted a whole lot of this.
[Guest]: Now, obviously, for me, it was an act of serendipity, I mistyped the guy's name.
[Guest]: And then I saw that.
[Guest]: But that brief moment opened me up to the fact that such a thing was even possible.
[Guest]: But because I didn't follow the person, it's gone forever.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So sometimes, I think that some of the best things that I've seen in my life, I have no
[Guest]: record of, I mean, this was one such example of that, or, you know, camera technology was
[Guest]: so primitive, that, you know, many of them, even in one of those cameras, which we had
[Guest]: access to, they were small, cheap cameras, you know, Agfa Click 3 kind of cameras.
[Guest]: And I've experienced the sunrise at Tiger Hill, which is such a gorgeous experience.
[Guest]: I have no evidence of that, because my father used to say that, you know, I used to get
[Guest]: 36 exposures.
[Guest]: He would say that, 36 photographs of a vacation, what are you going to do with so many photographs?
[Guest]: So our notion of scarcity versus the time of abundance that we live in, also changes
[Guest]: how we view things.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So when you live in a world of abundance, you deal with things and experiences very
[Guest]: differently because you know, it'll come back again.
[Guest]: You don't hang on to something and make it part of your life.
[Guest]: Because this is going to be back again.
[Guest]: If I miss watching the movie, I know in like, you know, whatever, a couple of days, it'll
[Guest]: be on one of the OTT platforms, and I will watch it there.
[Guest]: So there's no hunger for a shared experience either, that in any case, the pandemic sort
[Guest]: of killed whatever little was left of it.
[Guest]: You know, you don't go to a movie theater to watch something.
[Guest]: You kind of say that, okay, I'm going to watch it, because I can sit in my living room and
[Guest]: switch it on when I want.
[Guest]: There is a freedom to it.
[Guest]: And there is a certain experience of watching it with people laughing together.
[Guest]: And you know, when you watch movies in some of the smaller towns, you know, when you go
[Guest]: and watch a regional film, it's an experience that cannot be replicated, you know, at home.
[Guest]: It will never be.
[Guest]: Because you find, you know, that there's a person who's selling tea, who's also, you
[Guest]: know, got that little push pump stove, you know, used to pump into it and sort of making
[Guest]: tea out there to serve to people as it is happening.
[Guest]: And when there's a song which is there, people are sharing coins, they go up in front of
[Guest]: the screen and dance.
[Guest]: Where would you see it in a sanitized environment today?
[Guest]: So the homogeneity of experiences is where you are losing your ability to be creative.
[Guest]: Creativity necessarily comes from a variety of those experiences, where you are living
[Guest]: life without an ROI.
[Guest]: And you are connecting the dot maybe through a short form post or you're, that's different,
[Guest]: you are sort of drawing from those many experiences.
[Guest]: But it begins because you are having that kind of a time to explore or stuff like that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I love your phrase living life without an ROI.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just, you know, here's what sometimes happens, right?
[Amit Varma]: As I grow older, I am thinking that too often, too much of our lives, we live without being
[Amit Varma]: in the moment, not in the typical banal sense, but for example, like your thought about the
[Amit Varma]: sunset sparked it off, that you're there, you're watching a sunset.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, in the modern times, there is that imperative that I want to capture
[Amit Varma]: the sunset, right?
[Amit Varma]: So you put it on Instagram or wherever, or equally, so here you're experiencing something,
[Amit Varma]: but you feel that you want to also capture it.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, you might want to do something, but you might feel you want validation for
[Amit Varma]: it, and you want people to kind of, you want their approval.
[Amit Varma]: And this added layer of wanting to capture wanting validation, I think takes away from
[Amit Varma]: the moment, it takes you out of the moment, because you want something else out of it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the sort of conclusions I have come to, and it's a double edged conclusion,
[Amit Varma]: is that look, the only way to happiness, and I know you have detailed thoughts on happiness,
[Amit Varma]: we'll also discuss, but for me, the only way to happiness is really to be in the moment
[Amit Varma]: and take that happiness in the small joys.
[Amit Varma]: And I cannot capture them.
[Amit Varma]: And even if I were to capture it, like, let's say I'm at my window, and I'm looking at out
[Amit Varma]: of the night sky, and I feel nice.
[Amit Varma]: And then I say, Oh, I got to capture this.
[Amit Varma]: So I take a selfie like this, me looking out of the night sky or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And then I see the selfie later.
[Amit Varma]: Does it make me happy to see the selfie later?
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm not even remembering a moment of happiness, because at the time of taking the selfie,
[Amit Varma]: I'm not there.
[Amit Varma]: And my sort of complicated thought about happiness, which I can't figure out, is that, if you
[Amit Varma]: are happy, you, however you define it, you can't actually be conscious of it, the moment
[Amit Varma]: you think I am happy, you are out of that moment.
[Amit Varma]: And it doesn't kind of work like this is very morbid, but a couple of days back, and I don't
[Amit Varma]: know why it comes to me, I met a bunch of my writing students.
[Amit Varma]: And we were chatting about a bunch of things.
[Amit Varma]: And I brought up the point that when someone dies, their whole life amounts to how they
[Amit Varma]: felt in that last second.
[Amit Varma]: In the sense that if I am going to die now, I'm on my deathbed, my whole body is screaming
[Amit Varma]: with pain, I'm feeling bad.
[Amit Varma]: That's it.
[Amit Varma]: Everything before it really is meaningless, I could have had a happy life and contributed
[Amit Varma]: to a lot of people.
[Amit Varma]: But that is it at that moment, I'm reduced to that.
[Amit Varma]: And that's it.
[Amit Varma]: And vice versa, which is why I sometimes think that the best way to go is just to go suddenly,
[Amit Varma]: you know, something happens and you're gone and there's kind of nothing there.
[Amit Varma]: But it also tells me about how everything is transient.
[Amit Varma]: And you can't actually, you know, what is a happy life then I mean, we have you look
[Amit Varma]: at happiness, always in retrospect, you build narratives in retrospect, that how that happened.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't know if it even makes sense to talk of it in that manner.
[Amit Varma]: Because for me, therefore, you know, if you think too much of happiness, if you overthink
[Amit Varma]: it, then it kind of doesn't work.
[Amit Varma]: It's a bit of a rambling, but I know you have far more structured thoughts on happiness
[Amit Varma]: and the distinctions between joy, contentment, happiness, all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, with or without reference to that, what is your notion of happiness and
[Amit Varma]: how has it evolved over the years, like when you are a teenager, and you're thinking of
[Amit Varma]: yourself, what are the things that you would have then said that, huh, this will make me
[Amit Varma]: happy?
[Amit Varma]: Like, obviously, all the hasrat things I'm guessing going abroad or whatever, you know,
[Amit Varma]: meeting Bhimsen Joshi, but what would your conception of happiness have been then?
[Amit Varma]: And how has it developed now today?
[Guest]: So I think I didn't quite have a very formed view of happiness, I had things which I, you
[Guest]: know, and it was in the whole range of things, things that I think some of the happiest things
[Guest]: are that happen to us are when we don't record them, you know, because the act of recording
[Guest]: is performative, that you are now, as you said, that you watch the stars in the sky,
[Guest]: your first thought is boss, what an insta photo this will make.
[Guest]: So now your entire process of enjoying that, you know, starlit sky is gone.
[Guest]: You are now trying to figure out if I do this, then I must, you know, reduce the exposure,
[Guest]: increase this, then it shines like diamonds, and I'm going to put a witty line, what would
[Guest]: it be?
[Guest]: Would it be Lucy in the sky with diamonds?
[Guest]: And then you kind of say, okay, that would be fun, then I can put the track on that.
[Guest]: And that I think will get me more hits than if I didn't put.
[Guest]: So you know, you've stopped your engagement with the star finished long back.
[Guest]: And so the things that you experience, you know, there's sometimes when you, you know,
[Guest]: the people that I've never taken selfies with are some of my most precious relationships,
[Guest]: you know, my grandparents were such an integral part of my life, I don't have too many photos
[Guest]: of them.
[Guest]: Because, you know, many of those photos, for whatever reason, got lost over the years.
[Guest]: And therefore, I struggled the other day when some magazine or something said, you sent
[Guest]: me a photograph of yours from your childhood.
[Guest]: And I struggled with this, because, you know, so many of them have just that en masse bunch
[Guest]: of albums got lost somewhere.
[Guest]: So my childhood is completely undocumented in terms of photographs in that sense.
[Guest]: But I think which is why I cling on so desperately to all my memories, you know, and I've seen
[Guest]: that with so many people who tell wonderful stories.
[Guest]: And many of this is completely undocumented.
[Guest]: So you will see a version of life, which you have not seen, because you're experiencing
[Guest]: that moment through this person's eyes and that, you know, when that person was eight
[Guest]: years old.
[Guest]: And when they talk about this, you begin to experience that world, which you were not
[Guest]: privy to, but you now see.
[Guest]: And that happens when you have these unfiltered conversations.
[Guest]: I have seen that when you talk to somebody who's a stranger, where you don't, you know,
[Guest]: check their phone number and email address, because you're not going to go back and connect.
[Guest]: That person maintains the anonymity and therefore opens up and shares so much, you know, and
[Guest]: that I think is the most fascinating thing that you meet people who share a part of their
[Guest]: life, knowing fully well that it's a gift I've left with you.
[Guest]: And you've perhaps shared a gift back with them.
[Guest]: And nobody's ever going to go back and say that I gave a more expensive gift as compared
[Guest]: to the other.
[Guest]: It's just that you've traded moments with each other, which are precious.
[Guest]: So I think when you look at your life as a collage of these precious moments, I think
[Guest]: that's, to me, what gives me happiness today.
[Guest]: Over a span of time, has it changed?
[Guest]: Things that I've aspired for have changed.
[Guest]: You know, I remember when I got my first salary, I bought myself a set of very good speakers.
[Guest]: You know, that was the first thing I purchased.
[Guest]: And then I was playing those tapes through a car, you know, stereo.
[Guest]: And so then there's this friend of mine who came and hooked it up and, you know, he put
[Guest]: a little bit of something, something and put an amp, he put all this.
[Guest]: Those are all things that I gathered over a span of time, because at that point of time,
[Guest]: this was a luxury.
[Guest]: And I spent my entire first month's salary with that music system.
[Guest]: But it gave me so much joy, even though the quality of music, you know, the tapes used
[Guest]: to hiss.
[Guest]: And when you created a mixed tape, it's not pristine quality that you get today, digitized
[Guest]: and cleaned out.
[Guest]: But it is like the joy of eating at a roadside stall, you know, is it the world's most hygienic?
[Guest]: The answer is absolutely no.
[Guest]: But is it delightful?
[Guest]: The answer is absolutely yes.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, somewhere when you sanitize something over time, it sort of, you know,
[Guest]: loses its charm in some way, because the moment any experience becomes so sanitized, there's
[Guest]: nothing unique and distinctive about it, you know, so it is the same.
[Guest]: And I think that is the opportunity that we can still create.
[Guest]: So it is possible to be happy, but you have to be happy on your own terms, you have to
[Guest]: be happy based on what matters to you, and how you would structure the day.
[Guest]: And therefore, in some sense being without necessarily looking at a role model that all
[Guest]: my friends do this, you know, they're all signing up for ABC, I should be doing the
[Guest]: same, because I think they're doing the right thing and I'm not.
[Guest]: So I think each one lives on their own path.
[Guest]: But when you're traveling on that individual path, you come across millions of travelers.
[Guest]: And those moments that you spend with them are the precious ones.
[Guest]: But the moment you stop to take a selfie and record it, in some senses, yes, that selfie
[Guest]: will be shared and remembered for a long time.
[Guest]: But you know, and sometimes what it does is it makes you lazy, because you stop noticing
[Guest]: a lot of things.
[Guest]: Because you know, you can always go back and look at the photograph and, you know, relive
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: But you're reliving a very sanitized experience.
[Guest]: You're not reliving the smell of that place.
[Guest]: You're not reliving the temperature of that place.
[Guest]: You're not reliving the sounds that were there.
[Guest]: So I think those are some of the things that you lose out as you're looking at this whole
[Guest]: notion of trying to do the perfect thing, the most well curated, which is, you know,
[Guest]: what are influencers doing, that's pretty much it.
[Guest]: They are telling you what you should be experiencing.
[Guest]: In some sense, you build a relationship of trust with the influencers.
[Guest]: Therefore, you say, if this guy is saying it, there must be truth to it.
[Guest]: Because there's such an abundance of everything that you always feel that, oh, have you heard
[Guest]: this?
[Guest]: Oh, you haven't.
[Guest]: You must hear it.
[Guest]: Now, that's one reason for me to go back and listen to it.
[Guest]: So, you know, when you put the show notes, I take a lot of time to go through and click
[Guest]: on many of those, not necessarily all of them, because some of them are rabbit holes by itself,
[Guest]: you know, so you're going to get caught in that.
[Guest]: But there is this entire thing that you want to read about this person, be my guest and
[Guest]: watch it, read it, experiencing it.
[Guest]: So I think those are some of the ways in which you can do that.
[Guest]: Today, of course, you have the advantage of reaching out to many people in unstructured
[Guest]: ways also, you know, so on an audio platform, you know, LinkedIn audio gives me an opportunity
[Guest]: to connect with people in an unstructured way, just switch it on and say, whoever is
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: And it doesn't have to be that.
[Guest]: But the moment you announce it, yes, you are right that there might be 500 people in the
[Guest]: room at that point of time, but the conversation of depth that you will have with that one
[Guest]: person is probably just as precious.
[Guest]: So I think building space for serendipity without any structure, without anything is
[Guest]: probably the way I would define happiness.
[Guest]: For me, those moments which have been completely unstructured have given me a world view, which
[Guest]: I have not had the privilege of experiencing, good or bad.
[Guest]: Even when somebody shares something which has not been perhaps the most pleasant human
[Guest]: experience, you're still getting the privilege of reliving vicariously that experience which
[Amit Varma]: you wouldn't have.
[Amit Varma]: Just thinking aloud, I was chatting with Amitabha Kumar in this recent episode.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the themes we discussed was how if you write every day, you're not only understanding
[Amit Varma]: the world a little better, you're deepening your sense of the self, you're growing as
[Amit Varma]: a person because you're reflecting on things you're writing that act as important.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, it struck me that every time you talk with a stranger, the same process
[Amit Varma]: is happening.
[Amit Varma]: Because you're getting a window into something else, which is outside of you at that moment.
[Amit Varma]: And that interaction also can deepen your sense of the self and your understanding of
[Amit Varma]: the world.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And taking that Instagram selfie takes you in the opposite direction, it freezes you.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you are no longer looking outward, you're like focused on that process, how to
[Amit Varma]: take a selfie.
[Amit Varma]: Now, since you praise serendipity so much, I will tell you a joke about happiness, which
[Amit Varma]: a friend told me yesterday, and I just thought of it.
[Amit Varma]: And because you heard this joke serendipitously, you will perhaps like serendipity a little
[Amit Varma]: less because it is truly awful.
[Amit Varma]: But now I have to tell you, I thought of it when you said Lucy in the sky with diamonds,
[Amit Varma]: because this little joke about happiness is about two girls called Julie and Shuli.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so the joke goes like this, the story goes like this, the wise moral lesson goes
[Amit Varma]: like this, that Julie and Shuli are two sisters.
[Amit Varma]: And Julie's beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: She's just gorgeous.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you look at her and time just stops.
[Amit Varma]: And Shuli is not so beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, from inside, she's beautiful, but outside, she's not so beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, everyone thinks that, oh, okay, are these two girls going to go in different
[Amit Varma]: directions and Shuli is also kind of conscious that this is going on.
[Amit Varma]: Shuli's always got this complex that Julie is so beautiful and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And this affects their personalities also, because Julie naturally more confident becomes
[Amit Varma]: outgoing, Shuli a little withdrawn into herself.
[Amit Varma]: So they go to college, and they go to college and already you can make out Julie as a happier
[Amit Varma]: person if you're talking about happiness, while Shuli's notion of happiness is tied
[Amit Varma]: up with her sister, right?
[Amit Varma]: And they go to college.
[Amit Varma]: And Julie's popular.
[Amit Varma]: She's, you know, the belle of the ball and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody's wooing her.
[Amit Varma]: Shuli's kind of randomly doing her thing in a corner, spending more and more time in the
[Amit Varma]: library because a lack of confidence and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So they kind of drift apart in terms of personality also.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually they find boyfriends and they get married.
[Amit Varma]: And Julie, of course, marries this really rich hunk from an industrial family and he
[Amit Varma]: can have his pick of girls.
[Amit Varma]: But of course, he picks Julie because she's just so incredibly gorgeous, right?
[Amit Varma]: And gregarious by now because confidence matters.
[Amit Varma]: So he married Julie.
[Amit Varma]: And Shuli marries, you know, a standard accountant kind of guy, not very rich, not very well
[Amit Varma]: to do, but it's like you settle, right?
[Amit Varma]: But she's obviously jealous of Julie, but she's like, okay, I'll settle.
[Amit Varma]: And then after their respective marriages, you know, Julie's birthday comes around and
[Amit Varma]: it's about 16 days before Shuli's birthday.
[Amit Varma]: So on Julie's birthday, her husband gives her this beautiful diamond necklace, which
[Amit Varma]: is glowing.
[Amit Varma]: And it's like you turn off the lights and it's like, you know, it's a necklace of stars
[Amit Varma]: and it's just beautiful, it's gorgeous.
[Amit Varma]: So Julie shows it to Shuli and Shuli's happiness quotient just took a big dip because she's
[Amit Varma]: like, oh my God, diamond necklace.
[Amit Varma]: So she tells her husband that, you know, and her husband's a really nice guy.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe Shuli doesn't deserve the guy, but he's a really nice guy.
[Amit Varma]: And he's like, no, I love her very much.
[Amit Varma]: I have to make her happy, again, notion of happiness.
[Amit Varma]: So what does he do?
[Amit Varma]: He mortgages his house, his ancestral home or whatever, whatever he had inherited, this
[Amit Varma]: small sort of thing in a corner of the city, mortgages it, gets her that same necklace.
[Amit Varma]: And at that moment, Shuli is happy.
[Amit Varma]: And because Shuli is happy and her husband is a nice guy and he loves her, he is happy
[Amit Varma]: in her happiness.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: It's a beautiful story so far developing.
[Amit Varma]: Then a couple of years pass and then on another birthday, Julie's husband buys her this massive
[Amit Varma]: palatial house and it's just a beautiful house.
[Amit Varma]: And she takes Shuli there and she says, look what a beautiful house and I will have a house
[Amit Varma]: warming in this and that and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And Shuli is now feeling horrible.
[Amit Varma]: And her husband, a really good guy who genuinely loves her still, sees Shuli's unhappiness
[Amit Varma]: and therefore her unhappiness leads to his unhappiness.
[Amit Varma]: And he thinks I have to get her a house like this.
[Amit Varma]: Now the point is, his existing tiny house is mortgaged.
[Amit Varma]: What's he going to do to get a house like this?
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: Tough times.
[Amit Varma]: He sells a kidney.
[Amit Varma]: He sells a kidney and he gets her a house like that.
[Amit Varma]: So Shuli and Julie are now in the same swank neighborhood and Julie's got a beautiful diamond
[Amit Varma]: necklace and a big house and Shuli's got a beautiful diamond necklace and a big house
[Amit Varma]: and the husband has mortgages and one kidney less and whatever that shit happens.
[Amit Varma]: Then a couple of years later, Julie's husband buys her this incredible bus, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's almost like a home in itself, like you enter the bus and there's a living room, there's
[Amit Varma]: an area where you sit and there's actually marble inside the bus.
[Amit Varma]: It's like really swank, the bathroom fittings and all are incredible.
[Amit Varma]: It's like being in a luxury five star hotel, like even beyond that.
[Amit Varma]: It's like hasrat.
[Unknown]: It's hasrat, okay?
[Amit Varma]: That bus is like hasrat and there's beautiful pipe music playing everywhere, like not the
[Amit Varma]: kind of crappy music you would have put in your car after spending a month's salary.
[Amit Varma]: This is really good music, yeah?
[Amit Varma]: Incredible system, everything is like absolutely top class.
[Amit Varma]: And Julie's damn excited and she calls Shuli over to come and look at this.
[Amit Varma]: And Shuli is like, fuck, because no more does that diamond necklace give her happiness.
[Unknown]: No more does that big house give her happiness.
[Amit Varma]: Now she wants a bus like this.
[Amit Varma]: So she tells her husband and her husband who's finally, you know, mid career, whatever, he's
[Amit Varma]: doing things even with one kidney, he's kind of managing and things are okay.
[Amit Varma]: He calls every relative and takes every loan he can, he goes to every bank, he does all
[Amit Varma]: kinds of things.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I should not tell you this, because it's confidential information.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of sad, but he defrauds his company in a way that is guaranteed to get
[Amit Varma]: him into trouble later.
[Amit Varma]: But he does it because he thinks that I have to be happy.
[Amit Varma]: My happiness lies in Shuli's happiness, the bus will make her happy.
[Amit Varma]: So he buys this bus for Shuli, right?
[Amit Varma]: So now both the sisters have a diamond necklace, which sparkles like the stars in the sky when
[Guest]: you turn off the light at night.
[Amit Varma]: I kind of think I know.
[Unknown]: Quiet, quiet, quiet, quiet, don't spoil it for the listener.
[Amit Varma]: And they have this beautiful house.
[Amit Varma]: And they have these two buses.
[Amit Varma]: And one day Shuli says, you know what, I think both the couples, we should go on a vacation
[Amit Varma]: in this bus.
[Amit Varma]: And let's go somewhere, they name some cliff or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And they go on a vacation in the bus.
[Amit Varma]: And they leave the buses by the beach, and they go and they swim.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a beautiful time.
[Amit Varma]: And they're in the moment.
[Amit Varma]: There's no structure, they're not taking selfies, they're happy, Shuli is really happy.
[Amit Varma]: And then they get back to the bus.
[Amit Varma]: And both the buses have been stripped bare, thieves have broken in, they've taken everything,
[Amit Varma]: the carpets are gone, the marble is gone, the bathroom fittings are gone, the sofa is
[Amit Varma]: gone, the piped music system is gone, who would take that?
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's just an additional logical hassle to install it somewhere else.
[Amit Varma]: But it's all gone.
[Amit Varma]: Everything is gone.
[Amit Varma]: Both buses are completely bare.
[Amit Varma]: And Julie sitting there standing there by the beach looking out into the sea.
[Amit Varma]: And Shuli from behind walks through the sand, leaving footprints as one tends to do in the
[Amit Varma]: sand, you might be aware of this tendency of sand.
[Amit Varma]: And she goes over to Julie.
[Guest]: And what does she say to Julie?
[Guest]: Oh, God.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, I know what you're thinking.
[Amit Varma]: You're thinking what have I gotten myself into?
[Amit Varma]: I need a break.
[Amit Varma]: So let's let's take a quick commercial break and we'll come back and talk more.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more?
[Amit Varma]: I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading habit.
[Amit Varma]: This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and essays.
[Amit Varma]: There's a world of knowledge available through the internet.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem we all face is how do we navigate this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: How do we know what to read?
[Amit Varma]: How do we put the right incentives in place?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I discovered one way.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com,
[Amit Varma]: which aims to help people up level themselves by reading more.
[Amit Varma]: A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read.
[Amit Varma]: The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of every day, I understood the world a little better than I did before.
[Amit Varma]: So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to CTQ Compounds and check out
[Amit Varma]: their Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: New batches start every month.
[Amit Varma]: They also have a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up to date with
[Amit Varma]: ideas, skills and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future.
[Amit Varma]: Future Stack batches start every Saturday.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2500 rupees, 2500 if you use the discount
[Amit Varma]: code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: Up level yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with my guest Abhijit Bahaduri, who just had a shared experience of a Bollywood
[Amit Varma]: song before we came into the break.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't think he's going to be raving about shared experiences that much after this.
[Amit Varma]: You know, before we get back to your career track and get back to the linear track and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Another question I had with reference to your earlier days is that did you see yourself
[Amit Varma]: as a writer slash storyteller in the early days, because you're reading a lot, you're
[Amit Varma]: reading in different languages, you are a creative person.
[Amit Varma]: And you've gone on to write many books later.
[Amit Varma]: But at that early stage, as you were growing up and all of that, and Bengalis do tend to
[Amit Varma]: see themselves a little bit as artists, I mean, I'm half bong, but I kind of consider
[Amit Varma]: myself more bong than anything else.
[Amit Varma]: So that thing is there in the culture that, you know, writing, creating, those are things
[Amit Varma]: that you do.
[Amit Varma]: So how was it like for you?
[Amit Varma]: What was that journey through?
[Guest]: You know, when I was growing up, my father was, he had a master's degree in English,
[Guest]: and he was a gold medalist from Calcutta University.
[Guest]: He was really very fond of reading all kinds of languages, as I said, that I still remember
[Guest]: we had the fattest Hindi dictionary at home, you know, and so he used to sort of get me
[Guest]: to read a whole bunch of things.
[Guest]: We used to get the illustrated weekly and I distinctly remember his method would be
[Guest]: that he would ask me to read some of these editorial pieces in a newspaper, or some specific
[Guest]: writers, you know, Khushwant Singh, Mulk Rajan and various people who used to write for the
[Guest]: weekly in those days.
[Guest]: And he would, you know, get me to summarize something, sometimes he would say write an
[Guest]: essay on a similar topic.
[Guest]: And, and I used to find it so completely pointless that, you know, what is this even helping
[Guest]: me do, you know, but that was his obsession.
[Guest]: He just really wanted to inculcate a love for the language and reading and all that.
[Guest]: And, you know, and this whole thing that I read a fair bit, but more importantly, he
[Guest]: would sort of correct all the errors and the structures, he would say this just so wordy,
[Guest]: I still think, you know, I write very long sentences, so I must take your course and
[Guest]: improve my writing.
[Guest]: But yeah, that was, you know, the whole process, but I think that was the grammatical part
[Guest]: of learning the language and writing.
[Guest]: But I think a lot of my writing was encouraged by my grandparents, you know, so when I would
[Guest]: travel a lot, you know, in these little experiences, I would write about them to my grandparents.
[Guest]: My grandmother would have a collection of these inlaid letters and, you know, envelopes
[Guest]: and sheets.
[Guest]: All of it, she would have it stuck in a file and she would mark them, some are sad stories,
[Guest]: some are funny stories, and she would have these little things.
[Guest]: And she would, when she would get visitors, she would, you know, completely bore them
[Guest]: to death by reading out some of these letters I wrote to them.
[Guest]: But that in some sense, encouraged me to write because she would say, you know, it was fun
[Guest]: to read this and write about this.
[Guest]: And then at a point of time, you know, when I started to draw a little bit, I would illustrate
[Guest]: those letters and draw little cartoons in the margins somewhere.
[Guest]: So I started doing those, then I would occasionally draw and send them something and write a little
[Guest]: stuff at the corners.
[Guest]: So that was really a lot of the writing, which is for others to read.
[Guest]: But I think I sort of had my first short story published when I was in, again, eighth or
[Guest]: ninth in school in Hindi, ironically.
[Guest]: So I wrote that, and I don't even remember what it was, except for the fact that when
[Guest]: it got printed, suddenly I discovered that seeing something in print gave me a real thrill.
[Guest]: So then I would draw for some of these magazines and newspapers and all that.
[Guest]: So Hindustan Times, for example, used to have something called a children's corner, which
[Guest]: I used to, you know, submit some drawings for and all that.
[Guest]: It was good fun.
[Guest]: So that was my indulgence that I would, you know, read something, try to illustrate it
[Guest]: and create those.
[Guest]: Those were the pieces when I started editing the Hindi newspaper magazine, which I did
[Guest]: in school in the 11th and 12th.
[Guest]: There was a time when I wrote, you know, a little more, edited a little more stuff.
[Guest]: And then I started also writing in English at that point of time, you know, I was writing
[Guest]: little scripts for those radio plays, etc.
[Guest]: That, you know, got me to spend a lot more time writing English.
[Guest]: Bengali, unfortunately, my spellings in Bengali are terrible and, you know, so, and it's an
[Guest]: effort for me to write.
[Guest]: So I never really got down to writing in Bengali.
[Guest]: But I think when I started reading and writing, I think there's a ratio, until you read a
[Guest]: certain amount, you cannot and should not be allowed to write.
[Guest]: So I think there's a little bit of that.
[Guest]: And then, you know, progressively, I started writing for different kinds of magazines and
[Guest]: things here and there.
[Guest]: And once you get published, I think you kind of get a feeling that, all right, now I should
[Guest]: write some more.
[Guest]: So it's, it was that.
[Guest]: I published my first work of fiction much later when I was already working and all that.
[Guest]: So that was a much later journey.
[Guest]: But yeah, I wrote a lot of letters, I guess.
[Guest]: My father would insist on my writing, even though when I was living away from him.
[Guest]: I used to call him every weekend.
[Guest]: But he would always say that, no, I mean, it does not absolve you from this whole thing
[Guest]: of writing.
[Guest]: He loved reading.
[Guest]: So letters, he wrote extremely well.
[Guest]: So he would say, just write to me.
[Guest]: And then there was a point of time when I found it a burden that I would tell him that,
[Guest]: look, I can't be writing, you know, like long letters to you every week.
[Guest]: That's not possible, because I'm also talking to you.
[Guest]: And so much is not happening in my life that I can tell you that this happened, that happened.
[Guest]: So he says, no, nothing has to happen for you to write.
[Guest]: You can write about whatever strikes your fancy, whatever you're thinking about.
[Guest]: That's far better.
[Guest]: I would rather you sort of did that rather than to be like a diary that today I went
[Guest]: out to eat and tomorrow I...
[Guest]: So it's not that.
[Guest]: This whole process, I think, also, in some sense, built in this whole discipline of that
[Guest]: writing demands, you know, so then you have to sort of have a routine.
[Guest]: So I would feel very guilty if I didn't write to him because I knew he, at one level, he
[Guest]: would say, no, it's not something that I'm imposing on you, but I love to read what you
[Guest]: write for me.
[Guest]: And that, I think, built the discipline of writing, which I'm now, the grammar that I
[Guest]: learned or, you know, the prose and exposure to various other great writers.
[Guest]: That I think I owe to him, you know, whether it was my exposure to all the various novelists
[Guest]: that I read.
[Guest]: But I also think that in parallel, I owe my love for music to my mother who would play
[Guest]: a lot of these things.
[Guest]: So I think it was a great happy blend of literature and music in that sense.
[Guest]: Would I imagine that I would have wanted to be a writer?
[Guest]: I don't think I ever thought I have a book that I can write.
[Guest]: I was happy being a columnist, you know, so the occasional thing that appears in a newspaper
[Guest]: was good enough for me.
[Guest]: Writing was, again, I stumbled upon it, you know, so that's why there are so many roadblocks
[Guest]: in my writing.
[Guest]: I only stumble.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know what you're talking about, because I really enjoy Dreamers and Unicorns.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one recent lament of mine has been that back in the 80s, 90s, we used to write
[Amit Varma]: these wrong letters, right?
[Amit Varma]: You sit down to write a letter to your friend, perhaps with actual pen and paper, which even
[Amit Varma]: slows the process down further, there's a lot of consideration that goes into it.
[Amit Varma]: And more than that, there is this very touching connection you're making, in which by the
[Amit Varma]: act of writing a letter to someone and spending that time and sharing your thoughts, you are
[Amit Varma]: also telling them you are important to me.
[Amit Varma]: And when they write to you, they are giving you the same message.
[Amit Varma]: And that is a connection.
[Amit Varma]: And today, in a world where so much is just instrumental, we are all the time in these
[Amit Varma]: short crisp emails or WhatsApp messages, are you free at eight, or I hope you're feeling
[Amit Varma]: better and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And we've kind of lost that, like I advise my students all the time to journal, which
[Amit Varma]: in a sense is, you know, writing to themselves and deepening their sense of themselves.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, just thinking aloud, maybe I would add to that, that, you know, write to
[Amit Varma]: someone you love, write letters the way they kind of used to be, because we don't do that
[Amit Varma]: enough.
[Amit Varma]: And looking back, do you feel that, you know, the voice of the letters you wrote to whoever,
[Amit Varma]: to your dad or to your friends or whatever, to your grandparents, the voice was different
[Amit Varma]: from what you would go on to publish and write later, because, you know, what was that like?
[Amit Varma]: Because the good part of something like that, where you're writing a letter to your grandmother,
[Amit Varma]: is that you're not self-conscious.
[Amit Varma]: You don't have to posture, you don't have to pretend, you don't have to impress her.
[Amit Varma]: You are her grandkid, she is impressed.
[Amit Varma]: You don't have to do that.
[Amit Varma]: What was your writing like?
[Amit Varma]: Do you remember?
[Guest]: Sir, a lot of it was, you know, my experience of meeting different kinds of people in different
[Guest]: places.
[Guest]: You know, so when you live in some of these smaller towns, my dad's work would take him
[Guest]: to even smaller places.
[Guest]: So you know, the experience of being in those kind of things where, you know, sometimes,
[Guest]: and photography was expensive, you know, it was certainly something that was reserved.
[Guest]: So in some sense, I kind of think about it as, in those days, we used to hold our breath
[Guest]: when a photograph was taken, so that it doesn't get spoiled, or you can sort of take a photograph
[Guest]: of your big toe and put 35 of those photographs anywhere that you wish.
[Guest]: So we live in a world of abundance where you're far more careless with the resources.
[Guest]: Those days, you know, so what would happen is if, let's say, if I wrote on a white sheet
[Guest]: of paper, and I would draw those railway, the signs of the platforms, you know, which
[Guest]: reads out in yellow and black, in different languages.
[Guest]: So suppose you were in some place where there's a third language, it's normally Hindi, English,
[Guest]: and whatever regional language it's there.
[Guest]: So when they do that, I would try and mimic that particular script.
[Guest]: So it didn't make sense to me, of course, I knew what was the station which they were
[Guest]: talking about.
[Guest]: But I would sort of mimic that particular script and draw it out in that sense.
[Guest]: And then I would color it yellow and sort of put that.
[Guest]: So a lot of those letters, it was a labor of love, you know, you spend a long time,
[Guest]: it would take a fraction of a minute to read.
[Guest]: But a lot of care had gone into, you know, illustrating that and perhaps showing one
[Guest]: person sitting there, etc.
[Guest]: So this whole act of writing, drawing, writing, drawing is a very seamless process for me.
[Guest]: Because it was easier to draw than to take a photograph and put it there.
[Guest]: And photograph would mean that, you know, you wait for the reel to finish and then that's
[Guest]: rationed out.
[Guest]: And then you kind of, you know, give it for processing.
[Guest]: And then that takes a couple of days, and then you come back and then suddenly you discover
[Guest]: what you wanted to send that particular film has got, role has got spoiled.
[Guest]: So drawing was far more certain, I could do it there in the moment and that I think, you
[Guest]: know, and then I would do, I would copy a number of, you know, like, I started by copying
[Guest]: R.K.
[Guest]: Lakshman's drawings, caricatures, I would do that.
[Guest]: And I would do a lot of Mario Miranda's drawings, and I started to discover that he was very
[Guest]: good as an illustrator, not, I didn't like his cartoons so much, but I loved his illustrations,
[Guest]: you know, I just thought they were magical.
[Guest]: And then, after a span of time, then I started getting fascinated with Ajit Nayanan, who
[Guest]: I, you know, we had the privilege of spending a little bit of time because I was doing a
[Guest]: series for this magazine called Target, which was then edited by Rosalind Wilson and had
[Guest]: a phenomenal set of people who were very encouraging of, you know, people who are just beginning
[Guest]: to write a little bit here and there.
[Guest]: And I got a chance to do that kind of a series around drawing cartoons, how do you draw cartoons.
[Guest]: And Rosalind said that, since this was part of the India Today group, she said, why don't
[Guest]: you go and spend some time with Ajit, you will enjoy chatting with him.
[Guest]: That was my, you know, there's again one of those things which was phenomenal, because
[Guest]: again, somebody whose art I tremendously admired.
[Guest]: So I think those are some of the things, finally, it comes together in the form of a book at
[Guest]: some stage.
[Guest]: But there is a whole lot of, you know, riyaz that goes into it before you actually write
[Guest]: a book.
[Guest]: So it's a much further down the path.
[Guest]: So did I think of being a writer?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I wanted to be a writer, but I didn't know I would write a book.
[Guest]: The format was not very clear in my head.
[Guest]: I felt like writing a story.
[Guest]: So I wrote a story, then at some point of time, wrote a sequel, then I wrote, you know,
[Guest]: nonfiction as a way to challenge myself, then I tried to illustrate it and I wanted to do
[Guest]: a graphic novel, but you know, there was so much of content that I wanted to write about.
[Guest]: So the book Digital Tsunami happened in that format.
[Guest]: Then of course, this one, Dreamers and Unicorns.
[Guest]: So that's been the progression of writing.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of talk about your journey now.
[Amit Varma]: But before we kind of begin talking about your career and your journey, one tendency
[Amit Varma]: in a lot of your writing is that, as I said at the start of the episode, that you're taking
[Amit Varma]: a step back and you're kind of taking a broader view and building sort of frameworks.
[Amit Varma]: And the question here is that, was that a tendency that was always in you to sort of
[Amit Varma]: try and figure things out and therefore go back to first principles or try and figure
[Amit Varma]: things out at a meta level and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And then if you have that kind of thinking or that habit of thinking like that, then
[Amit Varma]: you can take a step back from anything and just look around and kind of apply those.
[Amit Varma]: So was that something that was there from the start?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it something that evolved in the course of your career?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, like when I think of HR, most people have a really bad impression of HR
[Amit Varma]: people.
[Amit Varma]: I have to confess still, till I saw your talks and I read your books, I was also like that
[Amit Varma]: these are the, you know, I won't use the word, but yeah, no, no, never.
[Amit Varma]: But the point being that, and this is true of everything, I guess, not just of HR.
[Amit Varma]: The point being that you can approach a subject or a field in two ways.
[Amit Varma]: And one is that while learning it, you in a sense, learn it in a shallow superficial
[Amit Varma]: way.
[Amit Varma]: And you kind of ratta maaro everything that you have to ratta maaro in the good Indian
[Amit Varma]: tradition.
[Amit Varma]: And then when you get out of there and you join a company, you tick boxes, things are
[Amit Varma]: expected of you and you tick those boxes so that your boss is saying, okay, you've done
[Amit Varma]: your work or, you know, when it comes to what you expect from others, you are making them
[Amit Varma]: tick boxes and you're not kind of really thinking deeper and going beyond that.
[Amit Varma]: And I think most people perhaps fall into the rut when it comes to simply thinking like
[Amit Varma]: that, going through the motions, doing what has to be done in any field, not just HR.
[Amit Varma]: And what others would do is kind of take the initiative, think a little deeper, think beyond
[Amit Varma]: those boxes that you have to tick and ask that, does this really make a question?
[Amit Varma]: Is this justified in this situation?
[Amit Varma]: Why are these boxes here in the first place?
[Amit Varma]: Where have they evolved from?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what can I do different?
[Amit Varma]: How is the world changing?
[Amit Varma]: All of that.
[Amit Varma]: You've clearly done all of that.
[Amit Varma]: That's your whole body of work that you've kind of come out of it.
[Amit Varma]: But when you started, were you kind of in the first category and you managed to move
[Amit Varma]: into the second category, do you think that some people perhaps get trapped in the first
[Amit Varma]: category?
[Amit Varma]: Like maybe if you're studying a subject you don't like, then you don't want to do the
[Amit Varma]: deeper thinking.
[Amit Varma]: You're like, shit, okay, I'm doing this because I have to learn the skill and I have to make
[Amit Varma]: myself employable.
[Amit Varma]: So I can buy Shooli a bus later on down the line.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, a lot of circumstances.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: Like I know it's all in retrospect, hindsight mein toh kuch bhi bol sakte hain, but looking
[Amit Varma]: back on yourself, were you that kind of person who is, you know, taking that cross disciplinary
[Amit Varma]: meta view, you're applying concepts from one thing to another thing.
[Amit Varma]: And already your reading, as we discussed, has been broad, you know, so what is that
[Amit Varma]: like?
[Guest]: Take me a little bit through.
[Guest]: You know, when I got into XLRA to pursue a career in HR, personal management, as it was
[Guest]: called at that point of time, I had absolutely zero exposure to corporate India.
[Guest]: And you know, as I wrote in my first work of fiction, Mediocre but Arrogant, the line
[Guest]: that I used there was that I knew of three companies, Tata, Bata and Sunlight, you know,
[Guest]: so I was that naive about the entire thing.
[Guest]: My father was in the government, that's the only world I had seen.
[Guest]: And I didn't want to be, you know, in the government.
[Guest]: And this was the new thing, in some sense, it was curiosity, not necessarily because
[Guest]: I had a great formed opinion about what it would be like.
[Guest]: And so then I kind of, you know, stumbled into it, again, from the point of view of
[Guest]: writing exams and this and that.
[Guest]: And I was not very academically inclined when I was growing up in college, etc.
[Guest]: College for me was one of the most enjoyable experiences.
[Guest]: And I think it sort of, you do meet an amazing range of people, you get to experiment a lot
[Guest]: with your life.
[Guest]: And it's done when you have no responsibilities, you know, college in India is such a unique
[Guest]: experience.
[Guest]: Delhi University, at least the time when I grew up, was very not so much, you know, structured
[Guest]: that you now need to do this, that and the other.
[Guest]: It was things that you did because you enjoyed.
[Guest]: So I spent a lot of time in theatre in college and, you know, I was part of the debating
[Guest]: society.
[Guest]: I got exposure to a number of people, I read, I traveled, I did all of that.
[Guest]: So it's really that.
[Guest]: Academics was a very small part of what was there, you had to do that in order to survive.
[Guest]: So that was the way I look at it.
[Guest]: It was when I started working for Tata Steel, when I went there, you know, I was part of
[Guest]: the setup, which was being run by Dr. Jitu Singh, who was then, you know, when I was
[Guest]: a student at Excel, he was teaching me, he was the Dean at Excel.
[Guest]: He had moved to Tata Steel and I was part of that group he was doing.
[Guest]: And I had never been in training and development before in my life.
[Guest]: You know, I had done regular HR, you know, industrial relations, factory strikes, all
[Guest]: that I was familiar with.
[Guest]: But when I joined there, you know, so I was delighted to get the job.
[Guest]: For one simple reason, it was in the Excel campus.
[Guest]: So it was just, you know, if you visualize a building shaped like a U, one wing of that
[Guest]: one arm of that U was the XLRI library.
[Guest]: The other arm of the U was the office where I went.
[Guest]: So it sort of saunter in and out of, you know, that office and walk into the campus for a
[Guest]: cup of tea to have a cigarette and all of that was, you know, that just was the big
[Guest]: motivation for me to take up this role.
[Guest]: When I went there, he sort of said that, why didn't you teach a course in learning and
[Guest]: development?
[Guest]: Now, in retrospect, perhaps he did that because he realized that I was horribly illiterate
[Guest]: about what I was supposed to be teaching during my day job.
[Guest]: So while I protested, but he said, I've already committed to teach one semester and then we
[Guest]: look at what can be done.
[Guest]: You know, that was a transformational experience for me because teaching people, you know,
[Guest]: where you've been on the other side of the bench, you realize that, you know, how the
[Guest]: students can be completely cruel towards, you know, profs who don't know what they're
[Guest]: talking about or who are sort of saying something which is obvious and mundane and all of that.
[Guest]: So you just put a tremendous responsibility on me, you know, that I just felt I had to
[Guest]: make up for lost time.
[Guest]: So during the period when I was to actually offer the course, I sat down and really structured
[Guest]: my thoughts.
[Guest]: I read and I created a coursework and all this stuff.
[Guest]: I first tried to, you know, just look for the subject outline when I was a student.
[Guest]: And then I discovered that I didn't have that.
[Guest]: So I had to start ground upwards and put that.
[Guest]: And the whole process of working with some of the other professors there, you know, who
[Guest]: I became great friends with, and those were people who sort of I learned continuously
[Guest]: from.
[Guest]: I had great colleagues who I learned from.
[Guest]: And of course, you know, this access to the Excel library where there was no requirement,
[Guest]: it was your own drive to, you know, that if I'm saying something and somebody says, how
[Guest]: do you know that?
[Guest]: Can I at least go back and say, yes, I actually read that.
[Guest]: That I think was a real transformational phase for me.
[Guest]: And I developed the love for reading business books.
[Guest]: That was when I first read, otherwise I had no exposure and no interest in reading any
[Guest]: business book whatsoever.
[Guest]: I think the very first business book that I would have read after Excel, it would have
[Guest]: been years later when I did In Search of Excellence or something to that effect.
[Guest]: That was the first business book that I read.
[Guest]: Because the whole notion in my head was who reads business books for fun?
[Guest]: I mean, how can that be anything?
[Guest]: Because for me, the yardstick was always, you know, the literature that I had gone through.
[Guest]: And then I kind of thought that if I can bring literature and, you know, my love for movies
[Guest]: and all that into the teaching, it legitimizes my watching a movie, you know, while I'm sort
[Guest]: of doing that.
[Guest]: And that's what I started experimenting with, you know.
[Guest]: So I remember trying to explain group formation, you know, to the class that I was teaching.
[Guest]: You couldn't sort of just be pompous and talk about various models because I didn't know
[Guest]: enough of them.
[Guest]: And more importantly, they were like friends, you know, most of them were like my vintage,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: They may have been a year or two younger than me, but that was it.
[Guest]: That forced me to sort of say, not talk down to them, but how do I translate it in a manner
[Guest]: which connects?
[Guest]: So I started playing a lot of, you know, Bollywood movie clips and all that and started explaining
[Guest]: for it.
[Guest]: I distinctly remember playing Mirch Masala, you know, the final scene where, you know,
[Guest]: Smita Patil is locked up in that fortress and they're trying to sort of do that.
[Guest]: And the conversation that it emerges from, or using Ek Rukav Gafesla, 12 Angry Men to
[Guest]: explain group formation when you're looking at that.
[Guest]: I mean, those are ways in which I started to bring in a different discipline.
[Guest]: And as you start looking at doing stuff like that, you know, I thought if I can bring in
[Guest]: my drawings and, you know, create cartoons on those little slides, you know, that would
[Guest]: be fun to do.
[Guest]: So I started doing all of that again.
[Guest]: So once again, you know, I carried back my movies and my drawing and my literature and
[Guest]: everything back into the business world that I was doing.
[Guest]: And I think that when you start to bring in a multidisciplinary perspective and try and
[Guest]: sort of explain it, you can make it interesting and simple to understand without really thinking
[Guest]: that you have to dumb it down.
[Guest]: I also think that, you know, one of the things that I heard from one of my professors, he
[Guest]: said, if there are 35 ways in which you can build something, you must know all 35.
[Guest]: It is only then that you can simplify it and say, okay, forget all this.
[Guest]: Here is how you would do it.
[Guest]: And that is something that has stayed with me.
[Guest]: I can't say that I can do it equally well all the time, but that's what I want to do.
[Guest]: You know, so the sketches are really a method of simplifying that.
[Guest]: This is how I've understood it.
[Guest]: And let me simplify this and make it accessible to you.
[Guest]: So that's really the way I think, so it's more of multidisciplinary point of view, which
[Guest]: sort of gives you a very different interpretation and which is why I think if you really want
[Guest]: to do human resources or talent management, as we call it today, you must have a love
[Guest]: for reading sociology or anthropology and psychology and sort of bring all that in.
[Guest]: Because it's only then that you understand that it's really all fitting into one common
[Guest]: kind of big picture.
[Guest]: And then you are less bothered about this is the rule, this is the thing, which I think
[Guest]: a lot of times people resent.
[Guest]: But one of the reasons why people resent HR people is because any function which is a
[Guest]: boundary-setting condition, we resent.
[Guest]: We resent boundaries.
[Guest]: So two functions in the organization, like finance and HR, they are both boundary-setting
[Guest]: conditions.
[Guest]: Finance, for some reason, we believe because it impacts business that you can't go and
[Guest]: spend this.
[Guest]: No, I'll not let you buy this equipment or you can't get a second laptop because you
[Guest]: just bought the last one a month back.
[Guest]: We understand those boundaries.
[Guest]: People will put that.
[Guest]: There's a limit to what you can spend when you travel.
[Guest]: People get that.
[Guest]: I think when it comes to organizational norms, a lot of these have actually been obsolete
[Guest]: for a while because many of these norms and practices were set up at the time of the Second
[Guest]: Industrial Revolution.
[Guest]: And many of them are just little modifications of the same thing continuing.
[Guest]: And when a lot of people protest those kind of things, that's a sign that it's probably
[Guest]: obsolete and it needs to be revisited.
[Guest]: The pandemic was just that.
[Guest]: I mean, it just challenged this whole view that you can't work from home.
[Guest]: Because the whole belief was that working from home means you don't want to spend your
[Guest]: privileged leave.
[Guest]: You are just sort of telling your boss that there's an extra day off that you are giving
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: And the bosses would say that.
[Guest]: I've had bosses who said, you don't have to apply for leave.
[Guest]: So work from home was meant to be taking a day off without applying for leave.
[Guest]: Today, we know that that's not true.
[Guest]: So the whole notion as it has been challenged and it's gone off, now that this has disappeared,
[Guest]: now we can really sit down and say, what do we need an office for?
[Guest]: Do we need it to go and do our work, which I want to do in private because I'm much more
[Guest]: efficient?
[Guest]: Or do I want to go to the office to socialize?
[Guest]: If you sort of really look at that, educational institutions, the value of that no longer
[Guest]: lies in the content that they share out.
[Guest]: It lies in the social interactions.
[Guest]: So whenever there is a workplace, then you are looking at the social side of work.
[Guest]: And that always is endearing.
[Guest]: But to do the work in that setting is not necessarily a great option.
[Amit Varma]: So number of thoughts, one, I love what your boss did, where he made you teach as a way
[Amit Varma]: of learning.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I, you know, the best way to learn something I have realized is to teach it.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, these days, sometimes I do that I tried, I'm getting into something and I'm
[Amit Varma]: trying to learn it.
[Amit Varma]: And I tell myself, and I'm not actually intending it, but I tell myself that I will teach a
[Amit Varma]: course on this.
[Amit Varma]: You know, because then that forces me to go into it with that depth.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I have to understand it inside out from first principles and be able to answer
[Amit Varma]: any question on it.
[Amit Varma]: And so I think that's a very enlightened thing that your boss did by pushing you into that.
[Amit Varma]: And what you said about drawing connections, like when I was editing the policy magazine
[Amit Varma]: Pragati, and we were, of course, writing about serious things, public policy, this, that.
[Amit Varma]: So I started this section called Houseful Economics, where the idea was, we would take
[Amit Varma]: cinema, and we would illustrate lessons of economics through cinema.
[Amit Varma]: I don't remember specific examples.
[Amit Varma]: I think Salman Khan in one of his films said, maine jo ek baar commitment karli toh main
[Amit Varma]: apni bhi nahi sunta ho.
[Amit Varma]: And we use that to illustrate the notion of constitutional rule setting, where it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: depend on a person, but you have these other normative, whatever, some sounds complicated,
[Amit Varma]: but it didn't sound so complicated, then I want to dig down on this very into this larger
[Amit Varma]: thematic question, where you spoke about how a paradigm that exists today, came about at
[Amit Varma]: one time because of a particular reason, but it's not relevant anymore, it's outdated.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you mentioned that, you know, workplaces or educational institutions can
[Amit Varma]: be ways of either socializing, or if you're going to an Ivy League university, it's not
[Amit Varma]: what you learn there, it's just, it's a signaling effect, it's a network that you build, it's
[Amit Varma]: what that brand carries and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And schools, in fact, are basically the main function of a school is to be a daycare center.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, parents would go mad if they had to look after kids all the time.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my question is, is like, I think about education a lot.
[Amit Varma]: And what I see, I think all the edtech startups around me, all the edtech startups are missing,
[Amit Varma]: are missing the key problem, they might be solving a small problem, they're missing the
[Amit Varma]: key problem.
[Amit Varma]: The problem that they're solving is they're just changing the delivery, that okay, you
[Amit Varma]: don't have to go to school, or we'll deliver education or knowledge in this new way.
[Amit Varma]: But I think just the fundamental way in which we think of education is broken.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this whole thing, the whole current structure of education evolved in the early
[Amit Varma]: 19th century that okay, you will have 10 classes or 12 classes or whatever, standards, grades,
[Amit Varma]: you know, kids of any particular age will all study together.
[Amit Varma]: These are the things they'll study geography, history, math, blah, blah, all the way down
[Amit Varma]: the line.
[Amit Varma]: And through inertia, and in an unthinking way, we've continued with that for 200 years,
[Amit Varma]: where I think it's no longer relevant.
[Amit Varma]: If we had to sit down today and design something from scratch, that is not what we would design,
[Amit Varma]: we design something else entirely.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not speaking in terms of delivery mechanism ki online class karenge, that's
[Amit Varma]: a entirely, that's an entirely different matter.
[Amit Varma]: And you've spoken about the same thing at length when it comes to companies, that you
[Amit Varma]: know, companies were once designed in a particular way, electricity made it possible for people
[Amit Varma]: to convene in a particular physical location and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of been changing all the way to the pandemic, where, you know, we've started
[Amit Varma]: working in different ways and putting it into practice in little ways.
[Amit Varma]: But conceptually, when people think of an office, they're still thinking of a physical
[Amit Varma]: place where air conditioning where people are together, and there are cubicles and cabins
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, so take me through a little bit of the evolution of this, that, you know, what were
[Amit Varma]: the conventional notions?
[Amit Varma]: Why did they come about?
[Amit Varma]: What has changed?
[Amit Varma]: And especially in recent times, what has changed about, you know, workplaces and how we should
[Amit Varma]: think about them.
[Guest]: So one of the things is, you know, you've got to look at three elements which are intertwined.
[Guest]: So work, worker, and workplace, they will always be intertwined, and you sort of change
[Guest]: any one of them, and the other two have to change.
[Guest]: So that's when the equilibrium is maintained again.
[Guest]: So for example, you're moving out from agriculture, and you're sort of getting into the first
[Guest]: industrial revolution, the way of doing work is through steam.
[Guest]: So then that allows for a certain kind of work to be done.
[Guest]: It allows for you to lift a certain amount of machinery and not lift heavier than that,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: So that leads to a certain development of the workforce.
[Guest]: So work changes the worker.
[Guest]: And then when these people come together, you need to manage this particular process
[Guest]: of the interaction of work and worker.
[Guest]: You have the workplace norms.
[Guest]: Fast forward 100 years, and you're looking at the second industrial revolution, and you're
[Guest]: looking at, you know, electricity.
[Guest]: So work is being done through electricity.
[Guest]: What it means is it creates new kinds of roles for workers.
[Guest]: For example, now that you have electricity, you can work at any time of the day.
[Guest]: So it leads to the, you know, three shift kind of working.
[Guest]: And we have assumed that eight hours is the optimal way in which people can work.
[Guest]: And therefore, you kind of do that.
[Guest]: And then when you work in shifts, you're looking at the shift supervisor.
[Guest]: Why is it possible to have a shift supervisor and the norms around the workplace develop
[Guest]: like that?
[Guest]: Because you're optimizing for mass production.
[Guest]: You're not making one unique thing.
[Guest]: It's no longer handcrafted.
[Guest]: It's mass produced.
[Guest]: So you have many of the same things.
[Guest]: Therefore, you wanted to create a system where the individual worker is irrelevant.
[Guest]: You can substitute one with the other, and that's Charlie Chaplin's Modern Times is a
[Guest]: classic example of where he's explained it so graphically.
[Guest]: And you look at that entire thing, and you say, okay, this is the workplace which needs
[Guest]: a different set of norms.
[Guest]: Because we are going to work around the clock, will one set of guys work around the clock?
[Guest]: I mean, you know, in the same common shift, late night shift or this and that?
[Guest]: What does it do to the worker?
[Guest]: And then you kind of say that people get tired.
[Guest]: For me, that was a warning sign.
[Guest]: We should have really asked ourselves, so why are people, if you look at the number
[Guest]: of times when you hear on the radio every Monday morning, this Monday motivation hashtag,
[Guest]: you know, these are all signs that there is something drastically wrong where people dread
[Guest]: having to go back to work.
[Guest]: And you find the RJs are screaming, why do they feel this way?
[Guest]: Why do they feel that, you know, it's something that we have to endure in order to do something?
[Guest]: Because there's a parallel larger system, which has stagnated and been left out of this
[Guest]: entire ambit, which is the education system, because that education system was feeding
[Guest]: the people who would go into that workforce, right?
[Guest]: And education was all about standardization.
[Guest]: Everybody studied the same thing, everybody was, you know, therefore, you put people on
[Guest]: that machine, they can start doing everything slowly in order to break away from that.
[Guest]: You kind of really have a scenario where somebody says, okay, this is mass produced, but this
[Guest]: is handcrafted.
[Guest]: And because it was not an abundance, it became precious.
[Guest]: So, you know, you kind of suddenly start to look at that.
[Guest]: And then as manufacturing gave way to services, you are beginning to see a time where the
[Guest]: importance of the individual who provides the service has started to go up.
[Guest]: And many of the places, you know, when you see shifts, the arts and humanities sections
[Guest]: see it first.
[Guest]: So you'll very often see that, you know, a writer would have written about something
[Guest]: that has happened only, you know, 30 years later, 10 years later, one year later.
[Guest]: You see Contagion, the movie, you know, it's crazy how it sort of almost seems to have
[Guest]: been like a documentary, which was made in advance, and I had never watched it earlier
[Guest]: at that point of time.
[Guest]: But when you watch it during the pandemic, suddenly, you know, assumes a different meaning.
[Guest]: So you sort of start to see that education has been left out of this entire change process.
[Guest]: So education remained a little disjointed, shifted.
[Guest]: And as work started to get more automated, technology started to get things done in very
[Guest]: different way.
[Guest]: Education became more and more distant from this.
[Guest]: And it's still sort of, you know, at a point of time when I wanted to, you know, teach
[Guest]: in a certain college, which I shall not name.
[Guest]: They said, yeah, it's great.
[Guest]: And this is after I wrote the digital tsunami.
[Guest]: And they said, why don't you come and teach, you know, HR in the college.
[Guest]: And I said, I would love to do that.
[Guest]: And when I drew up the course outline and said, we'll talk about how technology is changing,
[Guest]: they said, no, no, no, no, no, but that technology bit you can't talk about, because that has
[Guest]: to be done by another department.
[Guest]: So then you have to be part of that department, but then you can't talk about HR.
[Guest]: So this is, and I say that this is one of the most respected institutions.
[Guest]: So then I said, well, I guess then I'll wait for my turn some other time.
[Guest]: And I stepped out of that.
[Guest]: And then you have a scenario where, you know, there's this entire sort of set of academics
[Guest]: who will say that if you don't have a PhD, you cannot teach.
[Guest]: So now, of course, you do have something called a professor of practice and all that stuff.
[Guest]: But you know, the academics all still will gang up and say, but you don't have a PhD.
[Guest]: How do you know that this is right or wrong?
[Guest]: So this whole thing has meant that you've created two worlds.
[Guest]: So the best way to, you know, bring down somebody's thought process is to simply say, it's impractical.
[Guest]: This is not practical at all.
[Guest]: Whereas, if you really look at the philosophy of, you know, education as it was created
[Guest]: earlier, the greatest theories were drawn out of practice and greatest practices were
[Guest]: drawn from theory.
[Guest]: But today, you have a scenario where the most greatest compliment you can give to a person
[Guest]: is to say, your work is extremely practical, there's nothing theoretical about it.
[Guest]: Think about the irony of that.
[Guest]: So we have therefore, we've dismissed the value of learning and which is why you have
[Guest]: the ROI based learning.
[Guest]: You learn three questions, if you can clear that exam, it doesn't matter whether you understand
[Guest]: the subject or not, you clear the exam.
[Guest]: And that in turn opens up opportunities for you, that in turn opens up further opportunities
[Guest]: for you.
[Guest]: So the entire basis has been, you know, how do you bypass the system, which talks about
[Guest]: the massive culture of coaching classes everywhere, how do you, you know, crack the system.
[Guest]: So those are the kind of things that you, you know, there are classes which people have
[Guest]: for cracking how to appear in the Kaun Banega Crorepati game show, there are classes which
[Guest]: are had, where people will say, jawab baad mein soching aap, pehle when you press the
[Guest]: buzzer, and you know, you are called up, you've got all those 10 seconds, while the others
[Guest]: are thinking of 10 seconds, you know, they are thinking of the answer and they are debating
[Guest]: whether it's the first one or the fourth one, you've already pressed the buzzer.
[Guest]: Now you've got these additional 10 seconds where they say yes, so what would be your
[Guest]: answer, Amit?
[Guest]: And you have had the answer.
[Guest]: So now you can do that.
[Guest]: This one tip has put so many people into that game show.
[Guest]: So we are extremely good at finding how do you bypass that shortcut and take the shortest
[Guest]: distance, which is why you have the thing of, you know, three easy lessons from this
[Guest]: and it's a very popular theme, you will see that you win a match or you lose a match and
[Guest]: next day LinkedIn is full of three lessons from this match, four lessons of leadership
[Guest]: from this, four lessons from my dog, you know, this, this is, unfortunately, this is the
[Guest]: version that we are looking at, because we've put education to be something which is terrible.
[Guest]: It makes you theoretical.
[Guest]: And it is this whole process why, when you are looking at the nature of work as it has
[Guest]: changed, so many people are now getting displaced, because they've always been brought up to
[Guest]: sort of declare very proudly, I'm a very practical guy, I don't waste time reading.
[Guest]: It's a number of times I've heard, you know, people with many years of experience who say,
[Guest]: the last book I would have read would be Tinkle magazine, because I read it for my kid.
[Guest]: Now, which may sound very cute when you're announcing it somewhere, but what it does
[Guest]: is you shudder to think that this is the guy who's leading that corporation, you know,
[Guest]: so what options and choices would this guy have other than, you know, imbibed wisdom
[Guest]: that this is what I've tried.
[Guest]: When you have leaders whose sole worldview is based on what I've tried and experienced,
[Guest]: it works when the world is very small.
[Guest]: So, there's only one way to, you know, make an omelet, because that's the only thing people
[Guest]: will have.
[Guest]: There's only one way to boil milk.
[Guest]: But now you're talking of cuisine, that cannot come from just your experience.
[Guest]: You have to watch stuff, you have to read stuff, you have to experience stuff, you have
[Guest]: to do all this and connect the dots and sort of see how you can bring that in.
[Guest]: In this world of work, education has been completely divorced.
[Guest]: So, therefore, I think the challenge that we are looking at when we are talking about
[Guest]: what EdTech is trying to solve is that trying to figure out, okay, you don't need to go
[Guest]: to school, you can get it through my app or my website or my this thing, we'll give you
[Guest]: a video version of the book.
[Guest]: That is really not the process.
[Guest]: And the whole process is around how do you build curiosity and build a multidisciplinary
[Guest]: view because that's where work is.
[Guest]: You can't solve, for example, you know, in the pandemic, a great example of this is,
[Guest]: look at the irony of the scenario where the problem is not that you don't have a vaccine,
[Guest]: which at least supposedly solves the pandemic, you have a scenario where you're trying to
[Guest]: convince people to take the vaccine and the rich are holding several versions of the vaccine
[Guest]: and it's going to waste and there are a vast number of billions who will not have access
[Guest]: to it because it's, you know, people would rather throw it away than to donate it.
[Guest]: Now a lot of it comes from the fact that when you don't build empathy for a person who cannot
[Guest]: pay you back, back to the question of generosity, you cannot think that that's the right thing
[Guest]: to do.
[Guest]: Then you are only thinking in reductive processes.
[Guest]: You are saying, how is it going to benefit me?
[Guest]: What is the ROI of this entire process?
[Guest]: So I think this whole business of education being completely driven by exams is one such
[Guest]: casualty that you don't have interdisciplinary thinking.
[Guest]: You know, I can't go and teach something and draw in a reference from another, you know,
[Guest]: discipline because then it sort of treads into the fiefdom of another department.
[Guest]: So knowledge has become trapped in departments rather than being free and you solve a problem
[Guest]: using whatever you do.
[Guest]: This is really like saying that imagine if you had to build a house and you're told that
[Guest]: boss, you can take one tool of your choice.
[Guest]: It can be a screwdriver or a hammer.
[Guest]: You can't have both.
[Guest]: How would you build the house?
[Guest]: You can't.
[Guest]: So I think that's where education is today, that you have these walls and it's very hard
[Guest]: to find people who enjoy work because they're constantly told, this is not your work.
[Guest]: This is not for you to worry about.
[Guest]: So whereas problems are not created in one single discipline, problems are always multidisciplinary.
[Guest]: So for example, back to the vaccine example, it's a problem of science and storytelling.
[Guest]: It's a problem of understanding human psychology and religion and culture of a country.
[Guest]: But if you don't have leaders who have read the history of a particular tribe for no reason
[Guest]: not altogether, how would they ever do that?
[Guest]: And so therefore, one of the pieces would be if we made literature and reading and humanities
[Guest]: a lot more integral, it's not looked at as something like the other day somebody was
[Guest]: saying, I don't know why my kid has to study geography and history, and he's got to study
[Guest]: stuff like civics.
[Guest]: And this whole business that every piece that you are reading has to have an instant gratification.
[Guest]: You are not giving time for the person to process it and merge it into their worldview.
[Guest]: It's very hard for people to find the value of that, which is why today when you find
[Guest]: that somebody doesn't understand history, you have a certain kind of a view.
[Guest]: I remember just about a couple of days back, I was at a wedding and I was sitting next
[Guest]: to somebody who teaches history in a college.
[Guest]: And I was referring to the version of history that I learned by reading Manu Pillai.
[Guest]: So the person says, one sec, one sec, one sec, Abhijit, Manu Pillai is not a historian.
[Guest]: And I said, why do you say that?
[Guest]: I said, because, you know, so he says, no, no, they are not researched.
[Guest]: I said, you can't say that.
[Guest]: He's got like 50 pages of references.
[Guest]: But that person's book will never ever be prescribed by my college.
[Guest]: I said, well, that's sad that, you know, your students would, I hope that they read some
[Guest]: of the stuff outside of your college curriculum.
[Guest]: But I'm not even sure whether that's going to happen to a lot of people.
[Guest]: So it's horrible.
[Guest]: I think the greatest value that I see for work that you are doing, for example, in the
[Guest]: podcast, is to make content available in a format which can be in, you know, in my head
[Guest]: at some point of time.
[Guest]: And I don't need to worry about, you know, that I'm learning history, I'm just building
[Guest]: a worldview full of conversations.
[Guest]: So I think if we focus more on conversations as a way of shaping worldviews, we would be
[Guest]: solving problems very differently.
[Amit Varma]: So bunch of threads and one is, of course, the clearest illustration of how there is
[Amit Varma]: this massive mismatch between I mean, you'd imagine that in a marketplace of supply and
[Amit Varma]: demand, you know, education would be at the supply end where you are training people who
[Amit Varma]: are then actually doing useful things in the real world, whatever it may be, however you
[Amit Varma]: measure it.
[Amit Varma]: But the fact is that not only do we have a massive jobs problem in India, but many of
[Amit Varma]: the people who are actually being churned out by the education system are unemployable,
[Amit Varma]: even when there are actually jobs because they're learning nothing of any value whatsoever.
[Amit Varma]: And that Manu Pillay, first of all, he's been on my show many times, he's an excellent historian.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, look at his rigor, look at his work, look at his, he's absolutely fabulous.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's one of the reasons, I mean, what that illustrates is one of the reasons
[Amit Varma]: that many common people, I think, quite understandably have an anti intellectual attitude, quote
[Amit Varma]: unquote, and are suspicious of academia, because academia has really gone into this whole,
[Amit Varma]: you know, warped space of its own where, you know, the bubble has become a cage, especially
[Amit Varma]: in the humanities, not relevant to the real world anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I look at the academic world and I'm like, no, like, if you know, if I wanted to
[Amit Varma]: educate myself, the university would be the worst place to do so if it comes to humanities,
[Amit Varma]: science and all, obviously, it's a different matter.
[Amit Varma]: The best way to educate yourself is read a lot, maybe listen to podcasts, educate yourself
[Amit Varma]: in different ways, you know, joining a humanities department in any modern university would
[Amit Varma]: really set you back and make you useless for the real world, which is not to say that I'm
[Amit Varma]: judging humanities, I'm judging academia, academia has completely failed and which leads
[Amit Varma]: me to my next question, which is that, you know, in one of your talks, you give this
[Amit Varma]: anecdote about how you were sitting in for this interview.
[Amit Varma]: And the person who was interviewing someone with you, they asked the question to the young
[Amit Varma]: interviewee, that what is your favorite animal?
[Amit Varma]: And that person said, Oh, dog.
[Amit Varma]: And then eventually, the person who asked the question said, we'll take him and you
[Amit Varma]: asked why?
[Amit Varma]: And you said, because no, no dogs, loyalty and this and that.
[Amit Varma]: And then he asked the question to another person that what is your favorite animal and
[Amit Varma]: that person said horse.
[Amit Varma]: So he said, what kind of horse and that person said running horse.
[Amit Varma]: And then your colleague rejected him because he said that running horse means high attrition
[Amit Varma]: rate will run away.
[Amit Varma]: Correct.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this is a classic example of hardcore overthinking, right, where, you know, there
[Amit Varma]: is one kind of theory, which just comes from this kind of overthinking.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another kind of theory, which interacts with practice, as you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: earlier, and they feed off each other.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, those are frameworks that are based in what is happening in the real world.
[Amit Varma]: And you can apply them across disciplines, you know, as we'll also talk about after this.
[Amit Varma]: And, and those are that's useful theory, that's useful frameworks.
[Amit Varma]: My problem with a lot of academia is that a lot of your theories have no connection
[Amit Varma]: with the real world.
[Amit Varma]: And when they come in contact with the real world, they fall apart.
[Amit Varma]: But do you feel that's also then a danger in, say, management studies or in the books
[Amit Varma]: that are written about these subjects, because people may set out to write books, management
[Amit Varma]: guides or self help books or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes one wonders if there is a force fitting of frameworks, if you're trying to,
[Amit Varma]: if you're overthinking it in this dog being loyal kind of way.
[Amit Varma]: And is that then a danger that you find yourself warning yourself about, ki mujhe yeh nahi
[Amit Varma]: hai, mujhe jo har cheez hai, it's, it's something I've learned from practice, and I can apply
[Amit Varma]: and I'm confident it's there, so.
[Guest]: I think both are important, you know, one of the one of the reasons why academics and
[Guest]: the world of practice have fallen a little apart.
[Guest]: I think it's a tragedy for both because when you see that the best theories are drawn out
[Guest]: of practices, that what is a theory at the end of it, you observe something, you know,
[Guest]: and you find a pattern and you kind of put that together in a framework, which gets challenged
[Guest]: and there's further research and you sort of put it together, you modify it, it's a
[Guest]: iterative process.
[Guest]: It is when you kind of say that, if I cannot instantly apply whatever I've learned, then
[Guest]: there is, then it is useless knowledge, then in which case you get to the version where
[Guest]: let's say if, you know, I'm looking how to use a certain feature on my phone, I can look
[Guest]: it up on YouTube and do that.
[Guest]: That does not make me an expert on the phone.
[Guest]: I will not be able to fix it one more time again in future.
[Amit Varma]: I think my point was not so much about a practical value.
[Amit Varma]: My point was also about understanding something, you know, if you tell me the physics and the
[Amit Varma]: electronics of a phone, I'll understand how it works.
[Amit Varma]: If you tell me that the phone is a symbol of patriarchy, then I'm sorry, you've lost
[Amit Varma]: me completely, you know, and that's the kind of area that we've sort of gone into in modern
[Guest]: times.
[Guest]: So, I think a lot of it has happened because not enough people are reading enough of literature
[Guest]: and having those conversations because that's the only way you build a worldview where you
[Guest]: understand who you're building it for, yeah?
[Guest]: So, for instance, while in India, you see a lot of people signing up for these online
[Guest]: courses.
[Guest]: Our rate of completions are very pathetically low because, you know, you are hoping that
[Guest]: somebody is going to, you know, do something which will instantly get you the job, et cetera.
[Guest]: I think this whole obsession of knowledge with something that has to be instantly applied
[Guest]: in totality creates a challenge that it doesn't give you time to build connections with other
[Guest]: disciplines, your own life experiences, your observations, and that is where you begin
[Guest]: to take borrowed wisdom and apply it.
[Guest]: And then that gets concretized because, you know, you've done it and somebody else has
[Guest]: done it.
[Guest]: We are fortunately coming into a time where many of these conventions have been blown
[Guest]: apart, yeah?
[Guest]: And education, for example, we talked about that briefly.
[Guest]: If you look at this whole knowledge, you know, I wrote a short piece on my LinkedIn newsletter
[Guest]: which I talked about degree inflation.
[Guest]: So, the whole notion of, and I drew a cartoon which has somebody, you know, saying that
[Guest]: wanted BA and then, you know, somebody just paints an M in front and says, wanted MBA
[Guest]: because it's possible for a job which requires a fifth-grade pass out and the knowledge of
[Guest]: how to ride a cycle.
[Guest]: They are applying for a job of a messenger in UP police and it gets thousands of people
[Guest]: who are, of course, graduates and thousands of people who are, of course, postgraduates
[Guest]: and a few thousand people who are PhDs.
[Guest]: Now the question is, this is degree inflation in its classic sense.
[Guest]: So, if you take the person who is a PhD, are you being fair or unfair?
[Guest]: Because the job requires you to just have that basic level of knowledge.
[Guest]: One sign that you might want to think about is why are so many people applying for that
[Guest]: job in the first place?
[Guest]: But it also means that when you look at, it's not just in that level, you see it in so many
[Guest]: places.
[Guest]: You get an MBA simply because you can get an MBA to do the thing and therefore, you
[Guest]: know, you are having proliferation of, you know, management schools, every corner sets
[Guest]: up one and offers that thing.
[Guest]: And suddenly, you know, people turn back and say, but, you know, this person doesn't know
[Guest]: anything because you need a number of people to teach that way.
[Guest]: And teaching has become one of the least attractive options when you sort of really look at who
[Guest]: gets drawn into teaching.
[Guest]: When you look at that, and the moment you create educational institutions, the one place
[Guest]: where you should be investing is having better teachers, teaching them how do you become
[Guest]: more creative in the way that you, you know, teach, because today the students are not
[Guest]: just exposed to books, they're exposed to movies, they're exposed to podcasts, they're
[Guest]: exposed to YouTubes, they're exposed to Spotify.
[Guest]: How do you teach a person who has that worldview is very different.
[Guest]: So I would say that even the way that you read a book today, what I very often would
[Guest]: do is I would read a book, and then I often would watch the person talk about the book
[Guest]: on say, YouTube or Spotify or something, because I always find that when I've read the book,
[Guest]: I may have thought of something as important, and somebody else who wrote the book found
[Guest]: something else to be completely different.
[Guest]: And I never even looked at that shade, you know, when I read through that whole book,
[Guest]: this didn't even register, and I don't even recall.
[Guest]: So then I'll go back and reread that segment that the person is talking about.
[Guest]: So in this process of engaging with a book, you know, one thing that I would sort of look
[Guest]: at is, why don't we teach people to read books faster, and then summarize and write their
[Guest]: own, you know, reflections on that book?
[Guest]: Because again, the whole point is, what's the point of doing this?
[Guest]: So everything, you know, education is about doing lots of things which right now you can't
[Guest]: see any relevance for, but you will connect the dots later, you know.
[Guest]: So when you overlay many different elements, you see that if there is a country going to
[Guest]: war, you don't just take the common narrative that this guy is good, this guy is bad, and
[Guest]: this one is terrible.
[Guest]: You kind of say that, okay, there's a, you know, economic incentive to sort of do that,
[Guest]: because I've had the privilege of reading economics.
[Guest]: And they kind of also, you know, from the general reading of literature that I've done,
[Guest]: you kind of say that all political systems will try and sort of do ABC, and you kind
[Guest]: of begin to see that pattern.
[Guest]: So reading broadly, especially for those who are in the corporate world, I think reading
[Guest]: broadly, not just business books, but reading about music, reading about films, reading
[Guest]: about this, actually helps you create a far more holistic thing, which, you know, is more
[Guest]: human-centric, and therefore is not going to get into that resistance.
[Guest]: You probably design work systems very differently, you know.
[Guest]: So I think those are some of the possibilities that one should be, you know, exploring.
[Amit Varma]: No, and one of the things to note is that hunger is there.
[Amit Varma]: People want to know, people want to read, academia doesn't serve that.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you look at two historians who frequently been on the show, Ram Guha and Manu Pillay,
[Amit Varma]: they're both looked down upon by academia, and constantly criticized by them.
[Amit Varma]: But they are producing incredibly rigorous works of history, which has expanded people's
[Amit Varma]: understanding of the world in so many different ways, and more power to them for that.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you mentioned degree inflation, and I'm just kind of thinking aloud, that,
[Amit Varma]: okay, a degree is a signal, I want to hire someone, a degree is a signal that, okay,
[Amit Varma]: this person has done an MA, this person has done a PhD, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But these signals have lost value, because anything that is...
[Amit Varma]: If everybody has a PhD, how do you distinguish?
[Amit Varma]: Correct.
[Amit Varma]: Anything that is a metric can be gamed, and they've completely lost all value.
[Amit Varma]: So the question there is that, if you are looking for x, what is a good signal for what
[Amit Varma]: x actually is, and it is not the degree anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Like, when people who do my course, a couple of times people have asked you to give a certificate.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm like, you know, I can do a Jugaadu certificate if you want, as I have for a couple
[Amit Varma]: of people.
[Amit Varma]: But why does it matter?
[Amit Varma]: Why do you want a certificate?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, for me, whenever I try to learn something, I try to learn something for the knowledge,
[Amit Varma]: for its own sake, or because I want to do something with it, irregardless.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, why do certificates necessarily matter?
[Amit Varma]: And the other aspect about reading books faster is something I completely agree with.
[Amit Varma]: But I think the danger there is that that can also become a metric and that can also
[Amit Varma]: become a goal, especially when you said something like, you know, read a book, write a summary,
[Amit Varma]: then the summary becomes a goal, then you're rushing through the book to get to the summary.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas what I try to stress in my course is that don't think of goals, think of processes.
[Amit Varma]: Do you enjoy reading?
[Guest]: Do you reach for a book when you
[Guest]: I don't look at, no, I don't look at writing the summary as a goal.
[Guest]: So when I read books, very often I do the doodles because it just, you know, it helps
[Guest]: me recollect the book much better.
[Guest]: So to me, that's a summary.
[Guest]: And then I'll watch the YouTube video, then I listen to this guy on two, three podcasts,
[Guest]: then I'll think.
[Guest]: So I have explored the book from my eyes and others eyes.
[Guest]: And I've sort of done that.
[Guest]: And then when you write something, you've actually, you've now between each of these,
[Guest]: you've had the opportunity to sit back and reflect on some stuff.
[Guest]: And then when you write about it, it's potentially going to be a more thought through piece,
[Guest]: which is a lot more comprehensive.
[Guest]: It's not the metric.
[Guest]: So it is not that, you know, I would say, I would always, there are books that you go
[Guest]: back and reread, and there are books that you don't read again.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a one-time read and you kind of do that.
[Guest]: But I find that all the books which have had a nuanced view, it is not painted in one single
[Guest]: color.
[Guest]: There's shades and hues, you discover patterns which you missed for the first time, or maybe
[Guest]: even the third time.
[Guest]: So I think the ability to do that, if you're doing that, you're not really reading from
[Guest]: a metric that I will notch it up and say, oh, you know, I read this book.
[Guest]: But when you look at, when you've read multiple ways in which you can approach a problem,
[Guest]: you have more choices.
[Guest]: What Ram Guha or Manu Pillay and, you know, all these people are doing is, they've done
[Guest]: all these, you know, like I said, if there are 30 ways to design an incentive system,
[Guest]: you must know all 30.
[Guest]: But then you have the liberty to say, I'm going to use option number six with you, and
[Guest]: option number 14 with somebody else, and maybe with somebody I'll do half of three and half
[Guest]: of 11, you know, because that's most appropriate.
[Guest]: That option does not happen if you know only one way to do it.
[Guest]: So when you have so many of these colleges which are supposedly giving you practical
[Guest]: education, what are they doing?
[Guest]: They'll call a practitioner who will come and spend half the time talking about the
[Guest]: great work their company is doing.
[Guest]: When they do that, the students go back believing that is the only way, and especially if it's
[Guest]: a company they aspire to do, you know, aspire to join.
[Guest]: Then those big name companies, you get somebody who comes in and says, you know, we tell our
[Guest]: people don't do A, B, C. They will look at that as the, you know, as gospel truth because
[Guest]: they don't have an alternative point of view.
[Guest]: So to be able to understand nuances.
[Amit Varma]: What I'm saying is different.
[Amit Varma]: I think you misunderstood me.
[Amit Varma]: That's your process.
[Amit Varma]: In your case, it's part of your process.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is that if you set it out, if you have a class of 30 people, and you say,
[Amit Varma]: okay, all of you read this book and give me a summary at the end of it.
[Amit Varma]: What tends to happen there is that they will treat it as a task to be done.
[Amit Varma]: And this is, for me, this is really important that you should never think in terms of goals,
[Amit Varma]: but only in terms of processes and habits.
[Amit Varma]: You want to build a reading habit and that reading habit has to come from your sense
[Amit Varma]: of yourself as someone who reads.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if I set a goal, you know, like, let's say, if I set a goal that every day
[Amit Varma]: between six and seven, I'll read, you know, sounds really worthy, you can build your,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you can become a reader that way, you'll do it one day, two days, three days,
[Amit Varma]: and you'll fall off the wagon, then you'll follow further, then you will tell yourself
[Amit Varma]: ki yaar, I'm not a books kind of person, I'm a Netflix kind of person, or if you're gregarious
[Amit Varma]: and Netflix and chill kind of person, right, and you fall off that and it becomes a vicious
[Amit Varma]: cycle where your failure to achieve a goal affects your self image.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas the point is that if you begin with your self image, if you say ki yaar, I am,
[Amit Varma]: I'm the I'm a self taught polymath, or that's my self image of who I want to be.
[Amit Varma]: And I am the kind of person who when I'm bored, I don't pick up my smartphone, I pick up your
[Amit Varma]: book, then if you own that self image, then you will just be reading a lot naturally,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you will be doing the summaries out of pleasure, not because it is a task
[Amit Varma]: that has been set for you.
[Amit Varma]: So I think the challenge really is in motivating people and helping them to build these habits,
[Amit Varma]: rather than follow the whole school college system that this is your goal, do this, isko
[Amit Varma]: seekho exam dena, isko seekho summary.
[Guest]: So that's what I meant.
[Guest]: Yeah, I totally agree with you.
[Guest]: I'm sorry, I misunderstood that whole thing.
[Guest]: Yeah, you're right. I mean, I and I think you, you know, as long as you are able to
[Guest]: craft your own process of doing something, yeah, you're right that, you know, there may
[Guest]: be a time where, you know, you you take a break from writing altogether.
[Guest]: And then there is a time when I kind of, you know, intensively will write for a for a long
[Guest]: stretch, because all of them are important ways in which I structure my world, you know.
[Guest]: So I don't necessarily, you know, subscribe to this whole thing that you must do it from
[Guest]: the, again, it's the whole process of living without an ROI.
[Guest]: The moment you have a goal, there is an ROI.
[Guest]: This is my goal.
[Guest]: I have to produce three book summaries for this course.
[Guest]: Then that becomes the be all and end all of itself.
[Guest]: You stop enjoying the course.
[Guest]: It's the same pattern that you are saying when you take the selfie with the stars, you're
[Guest]: not enjoying the stars, you're not looking at the patterns that are there, are they,
[Guest]: is the, you know, in the sky when you see a whole lot of stars.
[Guest]: As a kid, I very often used to, because I could read three alphabets, you know, I would
[Guest]: say, does the sky write, you know, using Bengali or English or Hindi?
[Guest]: And I would at some point of time, I would say, ye to Hindi mein likha hai.
[Guest]: And some days I would notice Bengali and some days I would say, oh, no, that looks like
[Guest]: a clear O, that's a U.
[Guest]: So I think it's written.
[Guest]: And then I would sort of really go through that whole process.
[Guest]: This completely useless process, again, I'm using air quotes in this useless, is really
[Guest]: what made me who I am today, you know.
[Guest]: So the ability to sit down and, you know, just aimlessly lie on the grass and look at
[Guest]: the cloud formation and say, that looks like so and so person's face, can I draw a caricature
[Guest]: of that?
[Guest]: Then I turn it and then I say, oh, the eyes are missing.
[Guest]: And then you sort of do that.
[Guest]: So it's always this whole process of dabbling in different things and bringing it all together
[Guest]: at some stage.
[Guest]: So there's a convergent stage and a divergent stage.
[Guest]: Writing is always about that.
[Guest]: You know, most people kind of say that, oh, it must be fun to be a writer.
[Guest]: No, it's terrible to write, you know.
[Guest]: I don't think it's a fun process at all.
[Guest]: Fun process is the divergent process.
[Guest]: I meet a number of people, this conversation triggers a thought in my head, then I go and
[Guest]: watch a film, I see that, then I notice the same pattern now out here and then I do this.
[Guest]: Now comes a horrible part of writing the book, where you just have to sit down and go through
[Guest]: that rigor of structuring your thoughts and say, you may have thought about 15 different
[Guest]: things, but what do you want to say today?
[Guest]: What is it that you are talking about today?
[Guest]: And then it talks about convergence, simplifying, putting it together, and saying, am I being
[Guest]: too wordy about this whole thing?
[Guest]: You kind of delete it, you rewrite the whole piece.
[Guest]: So yeah, I mean, and for me, sometimes what happens is in my LinkedIn newsletter, for
[Guest]: example, sometimes I have the idea, I know where I'm headed with this, this is the basic
[Guest]: thing, but I fumble and struggle when I'm trying to put it together in writing.
[Guest]: So then I'll draw.
[Guest]: So I'll try and create a fancy banner, then I'll try and do an illustration of something.
[Guest]: And then I will do this, then that triggers a thought and it builds a connection.
[Guest]: I say, oh my God, how could I have even missed it?
[Guest]: And I'll go back and sort of look at that.
[Guest]: And this whole process for me is about, then I'll go back and say, oh, you know something?
[Guest]: Let's take a break and I'll listen to something or I'll watch some YouTube video or something.
[Guest]: But all the time at the back of your head, you are thinking about whatever you're writing
[Guest]: about.
[Guest]: That whole process, writing therefore is not just an act of putting an idea onto paper,
[Guest]: but it's a process of integrating your world and putting the essence of that, serving it.
[Guest]: It's like cooking up a meal for a very large number of strangers and a few friends.
[Guest]: So when you start doing that, you're always asking yourself, am I cooking only for my
[Guest]: friends or should I be also cooking for some strangers?
[Guest]: Because it's in that that you challenge your craft.
[Amit Varma]: I love this framework of divergent, convergent.
[Amit Varma]: I think when somebody asks me, what is it Amit, you were going to do so much writing,
[Amit Varma]: what are you doing?
[Amit Varma]: I don't see you writing.
[Amit Varma]: I'll simply say, it's divergent.
[Amit Varma]: It's divergent, convergent.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Abhi toh hum chill kar rahe hain.
[Amit Varma]: Aap mujhe skype pe dekh ke batao, kaunsi bhasha hai.
[Amit Varma]: Correct.
[Amit Varma]: So, okay.
[Amit Varma]: So my next question in a sense is a different kind of divergent, convergent, which is that
[Amit Varma]: if you look at the thinkers of the 15th century, the 16th century and so on, they thought broadly
[Amit Varma]: about a lot of things because our knowledge and everything was so limited that you could
[Amit Varma]: think broadly that someone like an Isaac Newton was not only doing the physics that he did,
[Amit Varma]: but was also interested in alchemy and was also teaching theology to pura sab tha.
[Amit Varma]: You know, people like what Plato and Aristotle are doing is asking questions about a whole
[Amit Varma]: lot of subjects rather than restrict themselves to anyone.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the way I define philosophy is like proto science.
[Amit Varma]: It is asking big questions that come before science and over a period of time, science
[Amit Varma]: will take over some of that area and some questions remain with philosophy and whatever
[Amit Varma]: remains is philosophy.
[Amit Varma]: You know, otherwise gradually science kind of takes things over.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what has happened in the last four or five centuries is that fields get more and
[Amit Varma]: more specialized.
[Amit Varma]: Ki, you know, sociology ek ho jati hain, economics aur ek ho jati hain, wahan se further splits
[Amit Varma]: till you reach a stage where today there will be an esteemed professor somewhere who is
[Amit Varma]: like an expert in labor economics in Latin America and blah, blah, blah, which is a very
[Amit Varma]: narrow field.
[Amit Varma]: And they'll know that lane and they'll know nothing else.
[Amit Varma]: But the trend that's been perhaps, I mean, I wonder if you'd agree that there's a little
[Amit Varma]: sense that now it is expanding again, in the sense that now people see the value of stepping
[Amit Varma]: back, thinking broadly, and applying common frameworks to different things, like the way
[Amit Varma]: that you know, you've done in your books and like the way that I try to do, yeh framework
[Amit Varma]: hai.
[Amit Varma]: For example, dissipation of the mainstream, decentralize ho raha hai.
[Amit Varma]: It's not just about one field, it can apply to a lot of things.
[Amit Varma]: And you apply it like that.
[Amit Varma]: You look at some of the great public intellectuals of our times, like say, Steven Pinker, right?
[Amit Varma]: Cross disciplinary, just, you know, getting great insight into a lot of work.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: I think that, you know, if you narrow down onto one damn subject, and you just drill
[Amit Varma]: down deep on that, and all of that, that's great.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, we need people like that.
[Amit Varma]: We need hedgehogs.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you've sort of, I don't know if you've used a specific term fox with regard to yourself,
[Amit Varma]: but I read you writing about yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought, woh Isaiah Berlin ka jo fox in the hedgehog hai, that the hedgehog knows
[Amit Varma]: one thing, a fox knows many things.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that you are a classic quintessential fox.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I don't know if you were ever a hedgehog in terms of, you know, that particular
[Amit Varma]: specialization.
[Amit Varma]: But you're a classic quintessential fox, which is why these books are valuable, which is
[Amit Varma]: not to say hedgehogs aren't valuable.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, they are in a different way.
[Amit Varma]: We need that kind of depth also.
[Amit Varma]: But we also need this broad step back meta system syncing kind of approach.
[Amit Varma]: So what are sort of your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: You know, when you look at the world today, as it has become a lot more, so I, in my book
[Guest]: Dreamers and Unicorns, I talk about five forces that you must use while designing anything,
[Guest]: you know, today.
[Guest]: One of them is about boundarylessness.
[Guest]: You know, you talked about this whole thing that the world is so interconnected that the
[Guest]: problems are also fairly interconnected.
[Guest]: You can't solve a problem of one country without, you know, automatically impacting five other
[Guest]: places where somebody somewhere else is going to get impacted.
[Guest]: And you might turn back and say that, okay, let's go and, you know, put option A and,
[Guest]: you know, push that country back.
[Guest]: And suddenly you realize that your own cousin is stranded there and, you know, so you kind
[Guest]: of, it's suddenly from being very abstract, it suddenly comes back to strike you.
[Guest]: The pandemic, you know, when we've had, you know, tragedies in the past, you know, one
[Guest]: of the things that very often people talk about is that the tragedy is a statistic in
[Guest]: the newspaper until one of those people belongs to your family or is your loved one.
[Guest]: Then it suddenly means something completely different, a disease means something different.
[Guest]: So when you look at the world from a very personal point of view, you begin to see what
[Guest]: matters only to you.
[Guest]: But when you take a meta view, you begin to realize that all these things are fairly boundaryless.
[Guest]: For example, the largest companies in the world today are boundaryless.
[Guest]: You can never describe what is their core business.
[Guest]: I mean, what is the core business of Amazon?
[Guest]: It's not selling books.
[Guest]: They stopped doing that long back.
[Guest]: I mean, they still do it, but I'm just saying that it's a completely different planet altogether,
[Guest]: what they are known for and where their revenue comes from and what they will do.
[Guest]: And this employs, you know, such a huge number of people.
[Guest]: And if you look at that ecosystem, it employs a huge number of people and sometimes some
[Guest]: of these companies are bigger than the GDPs of many nations combined, yeah?
[Guest]: So there is a subtle shift of power away from one kind of a system to another kind of a
[Guest]: system.
[Guest]: Somebody who has read philosophy or economics and history and a little bit of geography
[Guest]: and civics can sort of map all this and say, oh gosh, this is a repetition of this particular
[Guest]: process.
[Guest]: So in economics, when you read Eco and SRCC, you also have to do political science.
[Guest]: And I always thought, my God, why am I being made to read political science?
[Guest]: I have no desire to pursue it ever in my life again.
[Guest]: Now I look back how foolish I was because when you read about things like Hegelian dialectics,
[Guest]: you learn about the fact that it's so powerful, thesis, antithesis, and synthesis, which is
[Guest]: one of the things that is the second piece that I talk about in my design principle,
[Guest]: that the world will exist as ants.
[Guest]: You will never have any more of that one homogenous thing, whether in media, whether in society,
[Guest]: whether in education, whether in the method of learning, it'll all be an ant.
[Guest]: You will learn partly from college and from an individual and from YouTube and from Spotify
[Guest]: and from a book.
[Guest]: It's all of that, which then turns back to explain, oh, okay, it fundamentally means
[Guest]: value is going to be created through intangibles, which is the third principle that one is talking
[Guest]: about.
[Guest]: Intangible things like brands become important, which is why you kind of say that, you know,
[Guest]: suddenly you find a YouTuber who's like all of 10 years old, who has 10 million followers,
[Guest]: now employs his parents and, you know, runs a company and is featured on the magazine
[Guest]: cover and, you know, makes more money than your CEO.
[Guest]: Suddenly you kind of say, okay, hold on, is this the exception or is this the signal of
[Guest]: something which is going to, it's a weak signal today, but that's where it is.
[Guest]: And therefore, when you look at the fourth pieces about managing, understanding emotions,
[Guest]: it has become so important.
[Guest]: And if you see what is the element which is missing in this world of Zoom meetings, that
[Guest]: you're missing the human connect.
[Guest]: Could we have done this conversation over Zoom?
[Guest]: Yes, we would have.
[Guest]: It would have been efficient.
[Guest]: We would have, you know, sort of put a time and then we would have done this conversation.
[Guest]: Efficient, yes.
[Guest]: Many of those nuances get missed because part of the response gets shaped based on your
[Guest]: response to the thing and I observe, you know, the way you're looking or the nodding of the
[Guest]: head or, you know, when you're flipping something, all of that, it's a part of that larger signal.
[Guest]: If you limit it to just one signal of what is being put across, you know, it becomes
[Guest]: very, very limiting.
[Guest]: So and then the fifth principle is, of course, it's in perpetual beta, so there isn't something
[Guest]: called a new normal.
[Guest]: That's a myth.
[Guest]: It's never going to be something like that.
[Guest]: But when you combine all of this, so many of the things begin to make sense that there
[Guest]: is decentralization.
[Guest]: Decentralization is happening in media.
[Guest]: Decentralization is happening in finance, you know, and you see the cryptos happening.
[Guest]: Suddenly it all connects up, you know.
[Guest]: So I think when you have a multidisciplinary point of view, you begin to experience the
[Guest]: world very differently because you are using multiple lenses.
[Guest]: And if you put in the lens of people, what does it mean for somebody who is, let's say,
[Guest]: you know, in a blue-collar role or somebody who is earning below a certain threshold of
[Guest]: money?
[Guest]: What does this mean when you kind of do something like that?
[Guest]: Is it good for them?
[Guest]: Is it bad for them?
[Guest]: Who's the beneficiary?
[Guest]: What's the incentive?
[Guest]: You suddenly start to use many different lenses when you create it, you know, when you build
[Guest]: multiple disciplines in your head.
[Guest]: So I think careers will also move in that direction.
[Guest]: It's no longer going to be about, you know, like I've used one of my highest views has
[Guest]: come from this thing which I wrote, are you a career 3.0 person stuck in a career 1.0
[Guest]: job?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: It simply means that you are going to be looking at a world where people will not just do one
[Guest]: job, which is you're an engineer, you retire as an engineer, one employer, or maybe you
[Guest]: change a couple of employers, but it's basically the same.
[Guest]: Career 2.0 is trained as whatever, and then decided to go and open a cafe and or become
[Guest]: a musician, you know, and that's the world that, you know, many people have taken on.
[Guest]: That's career 2.0.
[Guest]: It's like a fork.
[Guest]: Career 3.0 is like a pizza, which is sliced into, you know, multiple things.
[Guest]: You have multiple skills, which is monetized at varying levels.
[Guest]: And that is the world that most people will live in because of a variety of reasons.
[Guest]: One is, of course, we are living longer, you know, today, our average longevity is 72 years
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: In 1947, it was 32 years.
[Guest]: You know, decades have been added.
[Guest]: So when you look at that, if you pause and say, oh, that means when people talked about
[Guest]: four ashrams, you know, Brahmacharya, Grahastha, you know, Vanprastha and Sanyas, when they
[Guest]: are talking about this, you mean all of it had to fit in under 32 years or 30 years?
[Guest]: That explains why people had to get married at age eight or 10, because you are already,
[Guest]: you know, you are 50% down, you know, in terms of your lifespan.
[Guest]: And so then, you know, you are building space for many other things.
[Guest]: So when you suddenly look at many of these processes, a lot of things connect back.
[Guest]: And now when you look at, you know, when people are going to live to be 100, this whole notion
[Guest]: of retirement is such an irrelevant concept because, you know, it was done at a point
[Guest]: of time when this hard labor and everything meant people sort of died at a certain kind
[Guest]: of a pace.
[Guest]: And you said, okay, you know, enjoy the last couple of years based on what you saved up.
[Guest]: People today will not be able to do that because you are, you know, when you look at your savings,
[Guest]: what you will need based on inflation, just do the math and you will discover that, you
[Guest]: know, you will have to perhaps work out of economic necessity for most people.
[Guest]: Even if you don't want to do that, you are lucky enough that you made your whatever money.
[Guest]: How much of Netflix will you watch for the next, you know, 40 years, 60 years?
[Guest]: So the notion of time when it changes, your notion of your career will also change.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to come to the notion of time because you've also spoken about that and I keep talking
[Amit Varma]: to my guests about that.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, you know, I loved that video of yours where you talk about the concept
[Amit Varma]: of thinking in an and kind of way, becoming an and person and, you know, and the part
[Amit Varma]: of it which I really liked, there was Chindogu, which is a Japanese for useless inventions.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just direct people to that, I'll link it from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: But there is, you know, I thought of one, I discovered one example recently who fits
[Amit Varma]: perfectly into your framework.
[Amit Varma]: Have you heard of Miss Excel?
[Guest]: Yes, she teaches Excel on Instagram.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, she teaches Excel.
[Guest]: She's just an incredible person.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's the, that's the and, Excel plus EDM plus dancing.
[Amit Varma]: There you go.
[Amit Varma]: So that's your perfect and example.
[Amit Varma]: So let's let's talk about time because this exact example about why people used to get
[Amit Varma]: married young because you wouldn't live so long, I just chatted with, you know, one of
[Amit Varma]: my guests in a recent episode, I mean, I've recorded six episodes in the week before this,
[Amit Varma]: so I've forgotten who, but this exact thing that how does one's notion of time change
[Amit Varma]: and in another way, I think of, you know, people like you and me, where we've reached
[Amit Varma]: middle age, and, you know, when you're 20, it seems like time stretches out forever that
[Amit Varma]: 30 is an old man and at 50 is a sit down uncle, you know, that's how it seems.
[Amit Varma]: But when you reach my age, it's like a couple of decades just went by in the flash of an
[Amit Varma]: eye and your notions of time changes, which is why you start thinking more in terms of
[Amit Varma]: happiness and activity and what you want to do.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you've got a video on this where you get played around with this one sentence,
[Amit Varma]: which is I have worked there a very long time.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, not to give a spoiler, but to cut to the chase, you showed a picture of
[Amit Varma]: an old man, you ask your audience that this old man says I have worked there a very long
[Amit Varma]: time.
[Amit Varma]: What do you think he means in like 20 years, 10 years, blah, blah, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And then you cut to a bunch of teenagers and for them, it's like seven months that someone
[Unknown]: apparently I think you mentioned told you that I have worked there a long time and it
[Amit Varma]: works seven months in a place.
[Amit Varma]: And your point, which I found very provocative and worth thinking about, because I never
[Amit Varma]: thought about it in this particular way, is that therefore two people who are working
[Amit Varma]: together may in one sense, be completely incompatible, because their notions of time are completely
[Guest]: different.
[Guest]: Yes, that's very true.
[Guest]: Because when you, you know, when you look at people, when they stay in a company for
[Guest]: a long time, or they stay in a relationship for a long time, very often the unexplored
[Guest]: assumption is that our notions of time are similar, which means when I say, yeah, let's
[Guest]: do it quickly, you know, you and I roughly have the same thing.
[Guest]: It's unspoken, but it's understood.
[Guest]: The moment there is a mismatch of time expectation, it causes stress to either party and the relationship
[Guest]: will not last.
[Guest]: So therefore, when you look at attrition, when a lot of people, young people today are
[Guest]: leaving jobs, it comes from a variety of reasons, multiple reasons.
[Guest]: So it's not a single factor kind of a thing.
[Guest]: But when you look at it, it comes from the fact that young people also have a sense of
[Guest]: impatience because, you know, there is so much of time that they have spent.
[Guest]: You may say that, oh, this fellow, you know, worked with us for six months and he left.
[Guest]: You know, what an ungrateful person, we invested so much.
[Guest]: But in that person's mind, I could have spent a very long time.
[Guest]: I gave six months of my life to your organization.
[Guest]: And they feel dejected that it's looked at as, you know, an act of betrayal because the
[Guest]: people talking about this are older people whose definition of time is much older because
[Guest]: they have come from a point of time where if you sent a letter and in that video I talk
[Guest]: about that example in my ink talk that you write a, you know, letter to somebody in another
[Guest]: country, it's going to take three weeks to reach.
[Guest]: And if the person wrote back that very day and posted it, it will take another three
[Guest]: weeks.
[Guest]: So your instant response is six weeks away.
[Guest]: And today you find people who are competing with everything that, you know, this is on
[Guest]: demand, this is learning is on demand, your vegetables are delivered to you in 10 minutes.
[Guest]: And at the end of the day, we are getting an inflated notion of how worthwhile our time
[Guest]: is.
[Guest]: And parallelly, the polar opposite is they are getting bored.
[Guest]: I don't know what to do with my time, you know, because if you are not curious, long
[Guest]: life can be a curse.
[Guest]: So when we say, you live thousands of years, you are 50,000 years old, that is, you know,
[Guest]: the worst thing to tell somebody who doesn't have the wherewithal to engage themselves,
[Guest]: you know, in their own world for so many years, or who don't know how to build relationships
[Guest]: beyond what they've been handed over.
[Guest]: So they have no curiosity to spend time with strangers.
[Guest]: Their own kids are going to, you know, go away and they lead their own life.
[Guest]: And which is why so many people talk about emptiness, because nothing else has filled
[Guest]: their nest.
[Guest]: So you need to be able to figure out how do you structure time?
[Guest]: What does that mean to you?
[Guest]: And that's an essential component of happiness, because then you have a great view that, yeah,
[Guest]: if I spend, you know, five years, you know, it's a great place.
[Guest]: One of the places where I worked, where I, you know, completed five years, I happened
[Guest]: to be working in the US at that point of time.
[Guest]: And this is a company which has, you know, seen people working there for decades and
[Guest]: come and spent a great place to be and all of that.
[Guest]: And you know, when you complete five years, they give you some kind of a gift and some
[Guest]: that's a very small gift, but you get to wear a small little label pin kind of a thing.
[Guest]: So I found that, you know, my time was over and nobody made any reference to the fact
[Guest]: that we should be having some kind of a celebration to mark your five years.
[Guest]: And I was thinking maybe nobody knows me, which is true that nobody knew that I completed
[Guest]: five years.
[Guest]: They all thought I'd just joined and, you know, whatever.
[Guest]: And so then finally, you know, I had dropped many hints to my, you know, teammates and
[Guest]: they said, yeah, it's been a long time and these five years have just gone by and all.
[Guest]: And nobody reacted, you know, because everybody was used to working there much longer.
[Guest]: So five years didn't seem like, you know, something worth celebrating.
[Guest]: It is really what, you know, I felt when I saw these days, you even have graduation ceremonies
[Guest]: from prep to class one, you know, which was like, you know.
[Guest]: So it was one of those moments.
[Guest]: I went to somebody in HR and said, you know, I've completed five years.
[Guest]: So now what happens?
[Guest]: They said, oh, your gift should be on the way, you know.
[Guest]: So then you can go and collect it from so and so person.
[Guest]: So it was the dispatch office and I found that, you know, this guy was there and he
[Guest]: said, yeah.
[Guest]: So what can I do for you?
[Guest]: And I said, I've completed five years.
[Guest]: Oh, there was a box full of those little label pins.
[Guest]: He picked up one and tossed it like that to me and said, okay, go wear it and flaunt it.
[Guest]: I went so angry, I went and dumped it in the dustbin.
[Guest]: I said, nahi chahiye mujhe, is tarah se battameezi se de rahe hain.
[Guest]: And then I kind of thought that, well, in that place, five years is really, my notion
[Guest]: of time is not the same as the notion of time for this guy who's worked there for, you know,
[Guest]: 34 years or whatever.
[Guest]: For him, what is there to celebrate?
[Guest]: It is the same thing, I can understand celebrating graduation as in university, but graduation
[Guest]: from prep to one today seems the same equivalent, yeah?
[Guest]: So I think over time, as our perception of time changes, how we view others who are different,
[Guest]: you know, we start to look at them with a little bit of disrespect and, you know, don't
[Guest]: take them seriously because after all, what has this guy seen?
[Guest]: So a lot of it, in every culture, there's a premium placed on longevity of time, you
[Guest]: know?
[Guest]: Tumne kya duniya dekhi hain?
[Guest]: Main tumse bahut baddi duniya dekhi hain, mere baal safed dhoop mein nahi hua hain.
[Guest]: There are idioms, phrases, all of which celebrates that you spent a long time doing something.
[Guest]: And yet if you look at, for many of the people who are entering their teens or, you know,
[Guest]: people who are entering the early stages of work, they look at that as something which
[Guest]: is not positive.
[Guest]: If you tell a company that we've got a long legacy of, you're doing something for the
[Guest]: last 40 years, it's not something that a lot of people view with great, you know, notion
[Guest]: that awestruck, oh my God, you've done it for 40 years, they say, okay, probably someplace
[Guest]: I am better off somewhere else.
[Guest]: So notions of time are, you know, very, very important that they're determined, you look
[Guest]: at your friends, you probably have similar notions of time.
[Guest]: And which is why when you can sit down with classmates, you know, you share the same experience
[Guest]: of time.
[Guest]: And you turn back and say, yaad hai aisa hota tha, when you think about nostalgia, nostalgia
[Guest]: has no meaning for somebody from a different generation, it's boring.
[Guest]: And if somebody says that, oh, you know, I lived in a time when there was only black
[Guest]: and white television.
[Guest]: A lot of people, they will say, my God, what a disgusting world to have lived in.
[Guest]: So until and unless you begin to set aside your own judgment and, you know, evaluation,
[Guest]: and you start to say, what was it like when there was, you know, one television channel?
[Guest]: What did it really mean?
[Guest]: And you refer to it that there was a homogenized view of what is the truth.
[Guest]: And everybody shared it.
[Amit Varma]: Then we knew a lot about agriculture because of Krishi Darshan.
[Guest]: See another shared moment.
[Guest]: We are just dating ourselves by doing all this.
[Guest]: You know, Krishi Darshan was one of those, Chitrahaar was, you know, once a week and
[Guest]: you got to watch a Hindi film clip, you know, once a week, and you kind of suffered through
[Guest]: hundreds of ads just to see those, you know, five songs that would be played.
[Amit Varma]: And the Pradeep Kishan film in which Annie gives it those ones written by Arundhati Roy,
[Amit Varma]: that's famous for having aired only once on Doordarshan.
[Amit Varma]: And I saw it and all my friends saw it, not because we knew about the film or we are waiting
[Amit Varma]: for it or whatever.
[Guest]: But you got to see one film a week on TV.
[Guest]: And you didn't want to miss it for whatever reason.
[Amit Varma]: You didn't want to miss it.
[Amit Varma]: Toh sab jo bhi dikhate the dekhte the.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: So I started sort of showing regional films, you know, and then that's how I sort of, you
[Guest]: know, again, because there was so much of dearth of entertainment, you watch regional
[Guest]: films also, which was in some sense good, because it expanded my worldview beyond what
[Guest]: I had seen.
[Guest]: So it was lovely.
[Guest]: I mean, so in that sense, it was doled out, rationed.
[Guest]: It was precious.
[Guest]: So smaller things made you happy.
[Guest]: So you talked about ambition, ambition bahut chote hota tha, wahan toh koi ambition tha
[Amit Varma]: hi nahi.
[Amit Varma]: My father was an IAS officer back in the day, you know, and very sort of conventional in
[Amit Varma]: his thinking.
[Amit Varma]: So once I remember sometime in the 90s, after liberalization, he gave some talk about talking
[Amit Varma]: about the good old days, saying ki now I turn on the TV, I don't know what to watch.
[Amit Varma]: But back then we knew what to watch.
[Amit Varma]: There was only one thing to watch and he was romanticizing that and I had an argument with
[Amit Varma]: him.
[Amit Varma]: I was like, what are you talking about?
[Amit Varma]: Like, now I have so much, you know, I remember when star movies came and HBO came and you
[Amit Varma]: have films all day boss, MTV jab aaya tha, all day paagal ho gaye the.
[Amit Varma]: But I get what he's saying from the, you know, the mental equanimity point of view that you're
[Amit Varma]: not just going from one thing to the other, like Jonathan Haidt recently made the point
[Amit Varma]: that even though we are surrounded by so much information and knowledge and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: everyone is consuming what was produced in the last three days.
[Amit Varma]: And that's just so, such a frightening thought to me.
[Amit Varma]: Speaking of time, by the way, I also, once in a while, I think of dogs, like how do dogs
[Amit Varma]: suffer us?
[Amit Varma]: Because dogs have a shorter lifespan, so their days are faster, the nights are faster, everything
[Amit Varma]: is much faster.
[Amit Varma]: So to them, their human masters or their human pets, maybe they think of us that way, are
[Amit Varma]: such so ponderously slow.
[Unknown]: Of course.
[Amit Varma]: They're probably thinking that get a move on, throw the bloody ball, or how someone
[Amit Varma]: might react if they meet me in real life, and they have to listen to me at 1x.
[Amit Varma]: I can imagine a similar reaction.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about HR.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, what your book is, of course, much broader than that.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, as far as the workplace is concerned, as far as companies are concerned,
[Amit Varma]: and so on, what are the fundamental ways in which the world has changed, which people
[Amit Varma]: don't get yet, where conventional wisdom hasn't caught up, like there is always a lag, the
[Amit Varma]: world will change.
[Amit Varma]: And then there'll be a lag and people will figure it out.
[Amit Varma]: And big companies are actually the worst affected because they're the last people to figure
[Amit Varma]: it out because of their ossified bureaucracies and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And some of them if they cope, you know, they survive and others go the way Kodak went,
[Amit Varma]: you know.
[Amit Varma]: So, if you have to speak to, say, your peers within companies or within HR or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: and tell those guys, you don't see it, but take a step back, this is how the world has
[Amit Varma]: changed.
[Amit Varma]: This is what tomorrow will look like.
[Amit Varma]: How would you put that?
[Guest]: So, I mean, I don't think I have any great wisdom, which is different from what people
[Guest]: have, you know, who are working in different companies.
[Guest]: I would, of course, sort of say that, for me, one glaring gap that I notice is that
[Guest]: most companies do not have any way of researching who their employees are.
[Guest]: You don't, you see a lot of investment in consumer research, you know, you think about
[Guest]: qualitative research, quantitative research, semiotics, yeh, woh, sab kuch hai.
[Guest]: Why don't the organizations have equal amount of investment in the people?
[Guest]: If they did that, A, you would immediately begin to understand what makes them happy.
[Guest]: This particular bunch, and you are not limited by your own worldview.
[Guest]: One of the problems of the current method of power structures is that rules are made
[Guest]: by a set of people for the majority who they have no connection with, right?
[Guest]: And they do meet them occasionally, you know, you kind of, the relationship is sort of really
[Guest]: one of those occasional ones, you come home and you pat the little thing and the fellow
[Guest]: goes off, and then you do your own thing, you read your newspaper.
[Guest]: It's a lot like that.
[Guest]: And I think the only way you can build organizations once again, is if you really start to engage
[Guest]: with the people and really understand what are their deepest aspirations, what do they
[Guest]: want, what are the things that they care about.
[Guest]: And there are, you know, different places, of course, I'm still a big fan of reading,
[Guest]: listening and all that.
[Guest]: But those are some of the ways in which you can pick up what has changed because the medium
[Guest]: has changed, you know, so one of the pieces that I do for some of my clients is this workshop
[Guest]: called new media, you know, when you do that, most senior leaders have no way of engaging
[Guest]: with people on, let's say, a social media platform, because social media doesn't really
[Guest]: care about what an important guy you are.
[Guest]: If you have nothing worthwhile to say, I am not going to follow you, and people can unfollow
[Guest]: at a click.
[Guest]: So, you know, yes, you might issue a diktat and say, tomorrow morning, I want all 30 people
[Guest]: in my team to follow me, and day after they will unfollow you, you know.
[Guest]: So it just, you know, media has evolved all around and the world is no longer like an
[Guest]: aquarium, the working world.
[Guest]: The organization is not like an aquarium where you are, you know, in this particular setup,
[Guest]: you can get a view of the world outside, but, you know, this is pretty much a self-contained
[Guest]: zone.
[Guest]: Today, that aquarium is part of the ocean, so, which is why you find organizations in
[Guest]: really awkward settings where they have to perhaps put a commentary on social events
[Guest]: that are happening, social movements that are happening, political choices that people
[Guest]: are making, the way they do ABC, where they sort of do that, the leaders are really awkward
[Guest]: about the whole thing because they've never learned to have these dialogues, you know,
[Guest]: with people who disagreed with them, and you begin to understand, well, I don't quite still
[Guest]: change to your point of view, at least I understand what you feel about it.
[Guest]: In the absence of that, it is going to be harder for people to lead others other than
[Guest]: by force and diktat, which is going to happen in organizations where they say, yeah, you
[Guest]: know what, I don't want to waste time doing this, you can find another place, which is
[Guest]: what some of the companies have done.
[Guest]: In my view, I think those are some of the ways in which, again, just as work, worker
[Guest]: and workplace changes in tandem, leadership, talent, and culture also change in tandem.
[Guest]: The leader must spot the trend that is happening.
[Guest]: Now, most of the times, they can limit themselves to the product or the service that they're
[Guest]: trying to create.
[Guest]: So, most people are extremely buttoned up on that.
[Guest]: They know that talent is still looked at as part of a problem that HR or talent acquisition
[Guest]: is going to solve.
[Guest]: And therefore, most leaders, again, get very distant from that, except for the fact that
[Guest]: sometimes and hiring is one of the toughest decisions that you make ever in your life.
[Guest]: And having done it for so many years, I still think I'm like really average or below average
[Guest]: on that.
[Guest]: And I think I get so many things wrong, my predictions about people, because hiring is
[Guest]: really that, that you are making a prediction that this person is the best option for me
[Guest]: to deliver ABC task.
[Guest]: And that I have a way to reward and engage this person meaningfully.
[Guest]: Very often the conversation is just about the task, but we forget that, will I be able
[Guest]: to motivate somebody like this?
[Guest]: So when you hire a person who is extremely creative and innovative, which is great, you
[Guest]: can hire this person.
[Guest]: Will you be able to manage a person like that?
[Guest]: Because that person is good, is used to questioning everything and anything.
[Guest]: And you will find it a drag because the other guys simply say, yes, sir, yes, ma'am and
[Guest]: carry on with their life.
[Guest]: This person is going to turn back and say, why?
[Guest]: What do you mean by that?
[Guest]: Why should I be doing this?
[Guest]: Didn't we do this yesterday?
[Guest]: Why should we be?
[Guest]: And those are some of the places where people feel threatened.
[Guest]: So the thing is, they will not hire somebody like that or the person doesn't survive in
[Guest]: that organization system.
[Guest]: And then the organizations worry about how do we stay more innovative?
[Guest]: Then they do training programs around that.
[Guest]: The answer doesn't lie in just the training programs.
[Guest]: It has to be supported by the culture in which you operate.
[Guest]: So leadership, talent and culture are again interlocked.
[Guest]: And you can't change one without the other, the other two.
[Guest]: So that is the other equation that I think is so basic that you have to be able to, you
[Guest]: know, start leveraging it in the conversations.
[Amit Varma]: And how has the pandemic affected all this across two margins?
[Amit Varma]: One is, how has the pandemic actually changed the workplace and the things that companies
[Amit Varma]: have to take into account about the way that they work?
[Amit Varma]: And two, maybe there were things which were already changing, but we didn't realize it
[Amit Varma]: and the pandemic made us realize it, that, oh, these things were redundant, but we didn't
[Amit Varma]: know it.
[Amit Varma]: But we now know that it's redundant.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody doesn't have to come to office every day, for example.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the different ways in which the pandemic has kind of shaken everything up?
[Guest]: So I think a lot is written about how digital transformation has got sped up, you know,
[Guest]: is fast forwarded during the pandemic.
[Guest]: So a lot has been written about that.
[Guest]: I think less has been written about the fact that, you know, the employees are not the
[Guest]: same anymore.
[Guest]: And I'll explain in a minute what that means.
[Guest]: You know, very often when you see you have a teenager at home, very often you don't realize
[Guest]: how they are changing, you know, they are getting taller, their voices are changing.
[Guest]: You don't realize all of that until you find somebody who's seeing them after one or two
[Guest]: years and say, oh, my God, you've grown so tall or you've, you know, changed so drastically.
[Guest]: So what happens is, this is really a bit like the classmate effect.
[Guest]: So the people you've been to school or college with have a certain picture of you at that
[Guest]: point of time, you know, and they meet you once in a blue moon and they sort of perhaps
[Guest]: get to know that Amit has got this podcast, he's doing this, that and the other.
[Guest]: And all the successes and failures both surprise you because they are still looking at you
[Guest]: with a picture that's frozen back in time.
[Guest]: So if you are successful, then the constant thing is, that guy was so useless.
[Guest]: How come that guy became, you know, ABC, that's so amazing.
[Guest]: He was pretty useless, you know, I mean, he was not like this.
[Guest]: And he didn't, he wasn't very good at telling stories.
[Guest]: I don't know how he's become a writer.
[Guest]: Because we fail to understand that people keep growing continuously.
[Guest]: This is the adolescent kind of a thing that happens.
[Guest]: Employers are facing the adolescent kind of a thing right now with employees, because
[Guest]: for two years, they've worked out of their own home.
[Guest]: And they are used to working in an unsupervised environment, where the boss, if I don't want
[Guest]: to see your face, all I need to do is shut off the camera and then, you know, keep the
[Guest]: headphone on.
[Guest]: I'm, you know, responding to you, you have no idea, I'm not even sitting there, you know,
[Guest]: so they are used, they are not used to the level of autonomy that the people have experienced.
[Guest]: And that's going to be very hard for organizations to recreate the workplace where autonomy gets
[Guest]: restricted.
[Guest]: People are used to doing the work at the time that they do, yeah, and where they have, you
[Guest]: know, found very rigid systems, they have quit.
[Guest]: Lot of people have quit because they were unhappy, a lot of people have quit because
[Guest]: they had no choice, a lot of people have quit because they're really reevaluating their
[Guest]: purpose and saying, and tell me once again, why am I doing this work to pay the bills?
[Guest]: Can I lower my standard of living and, you know, take a job which is not killing me like
[Guest]: this?
[Guest]: And a lot of people are doing this.
[Guest]: The third is there is, you know, a big generational shift which is coming from the way that we
[Guest]: view work.
[Guest]: Because a lot of the people who are entering the workforce today, they have seen their
[Guest]: parents work hard and still get laid off, they've seen that, you know, they've given
[Guest]: their life, you know, they've not spent any time with the family, and one fine day the
[Guest]: company decides to do that.
[Guest]: Then in which case they have said, I'm not going to let the company decide and dictate
[Guest]: terms with which I live and work, I will do it by myself.
[Guest]: So the other day somebody was talking about a fact that when, you know, he asked somebody
[Guest]: in his team who had just joined work and said that, you better complete it and give it to
[Guest]: me on Monday.
[Guest]: And the person says, I'm sorry, it's a Friday evening, I'm going out.
[Guest]: So he says, okay, do it tomorrow at your convenience, he says, no, no, no, no, Saturdays and Sundays
[Guest]: I sleep and spend time with my dog.
[Guest]: He says, but you can do work, he says, no, but then who's going to spend time with my
[Guest]: dog?
[Guest]: Now, this is a question of, you know, people who worked for even 10 years, 12 years will
[Guest]: not ask.
[Guest]: They'll complain and say, you know, I've had to work over the weekend, and this is so terrible,
[Guest]: but they'll do it.
[Guest]: A lot of the younger people are going to turn back and say, hold on, I'm not going to kill
[Guest]: my, you know, weekends for you, because I have to send some meaningless report which
[Guest]: somebody's going to spend all of three seconds scanning over, for what, I'll do it on Monday.
[Guest]: So I think production systems, workplaces, work is not designed with this degree of autonomy.
[Guest]: It is being designed with that autonomy, which was taken away during industrialization, bus,
[Guest]: my way or the highway, if you want to work in this factory, then you will jolly well
[Guest]: come at this time before the siren finishes, I want you standing at the machine.
[Guest]: Today, the person says, but I can't get up at 8.15, I can't, I'll go at 10, I can stay
[Guest]: late later.
[Guest]: Now, that's inconvenient, because it's neither this shift, not that shift.
[Guest]: So work has been, you know, created in little silos and boxes, which is very hard for people
[Guest]: to manage now.
[Guest]: So I think we are, this distance has been, you know, the shift has been happening for
[Guest]: a while.
[Guest]: It's a bit like what I've talked about in Dreamers and Unicorns with, you know, how
[Guest]: when movies happened initially, we kind of thought that it's like theater, but there
[Guest]: is a camera in front.
[Guest]: So people still spoke in that exaggerated tone, why would you want to do that?
[Guest]: We'd never spoke like this, because it was meant to be a performance.
[Guest]: And then somebody said, hold on, why do we have only one camera static?
[Guest]: And you know, why can't we move the camera around?
[Guest]: What happens if we have that?
[Guest]: What happens if we have three cameras?
[Guest]: What happens if we put the camera on top?
[Guest]: What happens if we put a camera near the person's feet and show just the feet walking away?
[Guest]: And a new format of storytelling emerges.
[Guest]: It's the same process that is happening in organizations, and you are going to see that
[Guest]: a lot of times people will behave as if it is still theater.
[Guest]: They don't realize that, you know, the employees have moved further ahead.
[Guest]: I think it's going to either mean a very different kind of a leader or the organization structure,
[Guest]: and it will probably be both.
[Guest]: It'll be far more decentralized because, you know, work today is done by networks and ecosystems.
[Guest]: Whereas a lot of our reward systems, a lot of our development systems are still focused
[Guest]: on the individual doing things for themselves.
[Guest]: So the notion of leadership as somebody who manages an ecosystem, you know, needs a different
[Guest]: mindset.
[Guest]: An ecosystem is not just people who've had the same education as me.
[Guest]: An ecosystem is the community, an ecosystem is the illiterate people, an ecosystem is
[Guest]: the media, an ecosystem is, you know, everything else around me.
[Guest]: So the importance of humanities as a foundation, without which you can't work, because work
[Guest]: is no longer binary.
[Guest]: You're either with me or against me, it's just not the model anymore.
[Guest]: It is far more decentralized.
[Guest]: The building of community is a massive skill which nobody has taught us.
[Guest]: And yet that's where businesses are.
[Guest]: So when you look at, so today's social shifts are moving ahead of where technology is taking
[Guest]: us.
[Guest]: Those social shifts have to be understood before they become completely divorced from
[Guest]: what you're building.
[Guest]: And people who are able to do that, so today if you see what's happening in the Indian
[Guest]: ecosystem, you are looking at people who are, who have created products, that first wave
[Guest]: of people who created stuff for the, you know, top 1% of India, is done and dusted and then
[Guest]: now people are really building for the next 400 million.
[Guest]: And this next 400 million have very different needs and expectations and problems than what
[Guest]: the top 1% have.
[Guest]: So it will give rise to a different set of startups and unicorns and all of that.
[Guest]: But more importantly, you will find startup founders who come from that ecosystem, who
[Guest]: are not building for an alien system.
[Guest]: It's not, you know, a very fancy premium product being built for a third world country.
[Guest]: So you kind of say, let's build down the cost a little bit, they can't afford it.
[Guest]: It is going to be a different need altogether.
[Guest]: And only somebody who has lived in that world can create that.
[Guest]: And those kind of companies will have to be run in a very different way because they need
[Guest]: different talent.
[Guest]: You need talent which understands what they're doing.
[Guest]: There, you know, like I was talking to one of the entrepreneurs and one of the VC members
[Guest]: who said, very interesting example, she says that, you know, when you created the particular
[Guest]: app that they have built, they said, the shopping cart, you know, checkout is through a shopping
[Guest]: cart.
[Guest]: You and I, we understand that.
[Guest]: Now, a lot of people wondered what is that basket for?
[Guest]: So then they suddenly realized that the shopping cart does not connect.
[Guest]: So the visual language will change.
[Guest]: So the apps will look different.
[Guest]: The only person who can design something for that consumer is somebody who's lived that
[Guest]: world.
[Guest]: You know, it's funny because when you see a number of times when I look at cartoonists,
[Guest]: they find it extremely difficult, Western cartoonists find it extremely difficult to
[Guest]: do a good job of Indian faces.
[Guest]: So if you sort of see Gandhi's face, you know, or you look at any of the Indian leaders who
[Guest]: get drawn, you know, by Western cartoonists, for example, caricatures, they look completely
[Guest]: different because the Indian face structure is different.
[Guest]: In the same way, when I draw an Indian face, it is very different from drawing somebody
[Guest]: who's, you know, Western.
[Guest]: Face structures are different.
[Guest]: A person from the African continent has a very different face structure and bone structure
[Guest]: and body structure.
[Guest]: When you look at these individual differences, suddenly you realize a lot of the products
[Guest]: have not been made for people like this.
[Guest]: You know, and so when you begin to see small weak signals from different parts of the world,
[Guest]: you begin to do that.
[Guest]: You begin to become aware of a world which is so different.
[Guest]: And it may be a weak signal in your part of the world.
[Guest]: It's already a mainstream trend.
[Guest]: That's why when they say, if you are reading about something in the mainstream newspaper,
[Guest]: it's already done and dusted, it's on the way down.
[Guest]: So when you suddenly discover that, let me be part of it, it's already old school.
[Amit Varma]: So there's actually a term for, like, first of all, what you say about, you know, artists
[Amit Varma]: from outside drawing Indian faces differently is fascinating to me.
[Amit Varma]: So the next time any of my foreign friends, you know, does a picture of me, I'll say,
[Amit Varma]: dekhe, I am not fat.
[Amit Varma]: The problem is with your gaze.
[Amit Varma]: So I think that solves the problem.
[Amit Varma]: No, there's actually a term which economists use called isomorphic mimicry, which is basically
[Amit Varma]: you're transplanting something that has worked in another location and bringing it to this
[Amit Varma]: context and expecting it to work here.
[Amit Varma]: And that's really dangerous because you need to get really local and deep into it.
[Amit Varma]: And also what you did, that shopping cart thing, which you described, that's in design
[Amit Varma]: that's known as skeuomorphic design, where, you know, when Apple came out with their first
[Amit Varma]: e-reader, they had a bookshelf thing there.
[Amit Varma]: So people could relate or on many of these music editing softwares, you will have a knob
[Amit Varma]: in the thing.
[Amit Varma]: So people are turning a knob on the screen, you know, and email is still that envelope.
[Amit Varma]: Email is still that envelope, who has last seen an envelope?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So all of that.
[Amit Varma]: In your book, you've also thrown the provocative question that does the CEO have to be a polymath?
[Amit Varma]: Something to that effect, which ties in with what you're saying, that the function of a
[Amit Varma]: CEO has changed because the nature of the company has changed.
[Amit Varma]: Now, one of the anecdotes that I recall from one of the talks you gave, which was really
[Amit Varma]: interesting to me, was where you speak about this company, which made these instructional
[Amit Varma]: videos for their employees, and then obviously, they can see when the videos have been opened.
[Amit Varma]: And they sort of the videos are mostly being watched at times like 2am and all.
[Amit Varma]: And this is very counterintuitive, because typically, you'd assume the training material,
[Amit Varma]: they'll watch it in work hours and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But it is not the case.
[Amit Varma]: And this particular insight doesn't matter to me.
[Amit Varma]: But what matters to me is that I value these kinds of counterintuitive insights wherever
[Amit Varma]: they come from, because they give you insight into, you know, your employees, your readers,
[Amit Varma]: your listeners, who, whatever the kind of case might be.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of it really comes from machine learning, like, you know, you've spoken about
[Amit Varma]: how machines are really good on three different margins that if the work is rule based machines
[Amit Varma]: are great.
[Amit Varma]: If the work is repetitive, machines are great for scale, machines are great.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd go a little further.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd say that when you when you look at the current state of machine learning, that
[Amit Varma]: machines are actually capable of sitting back and coming up with counterintuitive insights
[Amit Varma]: you wouldn't otherwise have considered like, the example I use for this is alpha zero and
[Amit Varma]: chess.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Now, chess was dominated by computers for, you know, since 2003, they've been so far
[Amit Varma]: ahead that it's not even close.
[Amit Varma]: And humans really use computers for pedagogy, and for and you know, as a tool for learning
[Amit Varma]: and your main program, there was something called Stockfish.
[Amit Varma]: And alpha zero came and it took a very different approach.
[Amit Varma]: It said we won't try for, you know, to solve the maximum number of, you know, calculations
[Amit Varma]: we can we won't aim for scale or rule based or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: The only mandate it was given was to play with itself and learn from that and form rules
[Amit Varma]: according to that sort of teach itself how to think meta and build a framework.
[Amit Varma]: And it did that for about a day.
[Amit Varma]: And then it met Stockfish, which was until until then the strongest computer in the world
[Amit Varma]: and destroyed Stockfish.
[Amit Varma]: And the games are fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And what we also have is a sort of a record of how it taught itself.
[Amit Varma]: And that record is incredible, because in that record, you see it try out every opening
[Amit Varma]: humans have tried out, and is going through a similar kind of process, that there is a
[Amit Varma]: period of time when it is playing the French defense a lot, and then it drops it completely.
[Amit Varma]: And then eventually it evolves to the point where it is playing the Berlin defense a lot,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and which is currently very popular among grandmasters as well.
[Amit Varma]: But the key thing there is that when humans looked at chess, because it is so incredibly
[Amit Varma]: complex, they built these heuristics, which were really good as first principles as ground
[Amit Varma]: rules, for example, occupy the center, or initiative is important, and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth.
[Amit Varma]: And what AlphaZero demonstrated is that the weightages between these is different from
[Amit Varma]: what we understand that the relationship between say initiative and material may be different
[Amit Varma]: and that maybe initiative is, you know, more important than we thought it was and so on
[Unknown]: and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Magnus Carlsen's coach Peter Hein Nelson once said that I sometimes used to
[Amit Varma]: think that if an alien from another planet, which is just a superior species in terms
[Amit Varma]: of brain power, if they come and they play, how will they play?
[Amit Varma]: And I found my answer when I saw AlphaZero play.
[Amit Varma]: The point being that machine learning doesn't just sort of excel in all these specialized
[Amit Varma]: tasks like you know, calculate numbers really well and so on.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't just specialized in these specialized tasks, but more and more what we see is that
[Amit Varma]: they are going beyond that and taking over many other functions, higher level functions,
[Amit Varma]: than we would have thought in the future.
[Amit Varma]: So what are sort of your broad thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: Because you've spoken a lot about this, you've written about this.
[Amit Varma]: What are sort of your thoughts on how the modern workplace will change because of machines?
[Amit Varma]: And what is the role that humans can still play and the areas where they are still important?
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, what are the areas in which they will develop their skills?
[Amit Varma]: Because then the education for this next generation needs to be completely different from what
[Amit Varma]: it was for the previous generation.
[Amit Varma]: Because a lot of the things we have to learn now will just simply be done by machines so
[Amit Varma]: much better that we need to skip a level up.
[Guest]: So you know, when you look at machines, and if you just sort of see that, where is the
[Guest]: direction where machine learning and you know, this thing is moving, one of the principles
[Guest]: that's happening is that it sort of has worked on this rule based repetitive and scale kind
[Guest]: of a problem.
[Guest]: That's one end of the system.
[Guest]: The other end of the system is general intelligence, which is, you know, if you look at the other
[Guest]: end, you kind of see that, if you want to teach a machine how to recognize pictures
[Guest]: of a dog, then you not only have to, you know, show a particular dog, but you have to show
[Guest]: the same dog from multiple angles, you have to show a puppy, then you have to show an
[Guest]: older dog, then you have to show hundreds of breeds of dogs.
[Guest]: But the human baby who sees a dog one time, you know, can instantly recognize another
[Guest]: dog from a completely different species, and not think that, oh, that's like a table.
[Guest]: But for a computer, you would have to instruct it.
[Guest]: So the instructional process for creating that is, you know, as much as you are able
[Guest]: to feed it, which is so the problem of that system is, if the database that you are feeding
[Guest]: it from is not representative of the real world, you find, you know, bias creeping in
[Guest]: and all of this happening, which is a massive problem that, you know, machines have to solve
[Guest]: in the first instance.
[Guest]: So for example, the moment I, you know, watch, you know, five Polish language films, Netflix
[Guest]: will suddenly say that, oh, okay, so then you need to be shown only Polish language
[Guest]: movies.
[Guest]: Human beings are far more complicated than that.
[Guest]: So I think one of the principles that we will sort of really look at is, you will start
[Guest]: with algorithms, but you have to burst your own algorithm, because what makes us human
[Guest]: is our ability to burst the algorithm.
[Guest]: That you, you know, like one kind of cuisine, but you also like something else.
[Guest]: You eat non-vegetarian food, but in India, you know, non-veg has many shades.
[Guest]: There are eight kinds of vegetarians and non-vegetarians we sort of look at it, you know.
[Guest]: Some don't eat non-veg at home.
[Guest]: Some don't eat it outside.
[Guest]: Some will not have the sauce or the gravy, but not the meat, like all kinds of variations.
[Guest]: This nuanced view comes from your exposure to different people.
[Guest]: So the role of human beings will all come from generating insights from other people.
[Guest]: And those are the kind of connections which a human being can make in an amazing kind
[Guest]: of way, which machines will have to be taught, but that's a while away.
[Guest]: So if you look at the next, I don't know, five, seven years for sure, the nature of
[Guest]: where the opportunities will be, will be in the human side of it.
[Guest]: It's not good, for example, you may be really brilliant at math, you know, so unless you
[Guest]: are Shakuntala Devi, there is no way you can answer the question, you know, 19.7859 into
[Guest]: 75.863.
[Guest]: You will take a long time, even if you are really good at it.
[Guest]: A calculator can do it quickly.
[Guest]: And now you have a time when you will ask, but why would you need to know this, right?
[Guest]: So I think the notion of information and knowledge and learning and all of this has to change
[Guest]: depending on what technology makes it possible.
[Guest]: You may have terrible handwriting, but it'll all get standardized and put in the form of
[Guest]: a font on the computer, which hopefully if somebody designs it really beautifully, you
[Guest]: will have great handwriting.
[Guest]: And now you can choose the kind of fonts from your handwriting fonts to, you know, like
[Guest]: a movie or this, you can do all of that.
[Guest]: Yet at the same time, you will find that people who can write with that beautiful calligraphy
[Guest]: will still get millions of views on Insta, you know, because you're fascinated by the
[Guest]: fact that, oh my God, I mean, how can this guy write so beautifully?
[Guest]: What is that all about?
[Guest]: So I think those are some of the pieces that we will be sort of going towards.
[Amit Varma]: I'm actually optimistic and I say optimistic, it might seem I'm on the side of the machines,
[Amit Varma]: but there's no dichotomy.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm optimistic that, you know, that all of this progress, one, I think it's inevitable
[Amit Varma]: and two, I think it'll come faster than we even realize it, even something like AGI artificial
[Amit Varma]: general intelligence.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of broad questions, because you've been incredibly patient, and you've spent
[Amit Varma]: a lot of time with me.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe tomorrow, who knows in the future, you could have bots designed.
[Amit Varma]: So there'll be a bot that talks like me and a bot that talks and things like you and we
[Amit Varma]: don't have to do anything.
[Amit Varma]: We can chill at home and look at the star and try to read Urdu in the sky.
[Amit Varma]: But while our bots kind of do everything.
[Amit Varma]: So my penultimate question is that, if you're a young person listening to this, right, and
[Amit Varma]: you're thinking, okay, in this changing world, in the scary world, where, you know, the workplace
[Amit Varma]: is shifting rapidly, paradigms are shifting, new technology is coming up, everything is
[Amit Varma]: full of unknown unknowns, what are the sort of qualities that I need or what should I
[Amit Varma]: focus on to get ahead and prosper?
[Amit Varma]: And my very brief answer to this would simply be and you've described it as learnability.
[Amit Varma]: But I'll think of it as attitude that if you have intellectual humility, you're willing
[Amit Varma]: to learn, you're willing to work hard.
[Amit Varma]: That's a core thing, you definitely need that what else you build on top of that is different.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's, you know, learning actually has two, again, opposing elements.
[Guest]: One is you need the humility to say, I don't know, because if I pretend that I know it
[Guest]: all, then you know, this is one of the shifts that happens, that you need humility.
[Guest]: But at the same time, you need courage to try it out, you know.
[Guest]: So even when you're wobbling, if you're so self conscious that no, no, I will emerge
[Guest]: only when I'm perfect, then by which time things will change and you will not be there.
[Guest]: So I think it is managing this polar opposite ends, humility to say, I don't know, and I
[Guest]: will learn from whoever it may be somebody who is much younger than me.
[Guest]: And the person is going to say, I'm amazed you don't know this.
[Guest]: Yeah, I will, you know, live with that.
[Guest]: But then so what?
[Guest]: I mean, there are millions of that's not the only thing I don't know.
[Guest]: There are millions of other things I have no idea about.
[Guest]: Once you get comfortable with this, then I think, you know, it allows your curiosity
[Guest]: to be free.
[Guest]: Being being able to, you know, stay curious means that you're open to learning things
[Guest]: which you didn't know.
[Guest]: Two, I think when you look at learnability, it's also about not necessarily learning only
[Guest]: something that you can put into practice right now, this instant, you know, it's something
[Guest]: that becomes part of your DNA, and you kind of know how to do this.
[Guest]: It's the other way in which because, you know, when I did radio programs, for a long time,
[Guest]: I did shows and when I was growing up in All India Radio and Yobavani or Delhi B, subsequent
[Guest]: to that I when I went and worked, you know, in other places, I maintained my love for
[Guest]: that, that this is something that I want to be able to I used to really enjoy editing
[Guest]: those old spools and tapes and, you know, creating all those things.
[Guest]: When I went across when I was living and working in US by which time technology had changed
[Guest]: drastically, I learned how to edit and create, you know, little shows which I could do.
[Guest]: And I got a chance to go and become part of a radio station in US and I used to do a show
[Guest]: called movie magic, which I where I would talk about retro Bollywood and talk about
[Guest]: some movie and play some songs and all that stuff.
[Guest]: So this is what I did.
[Guest]: Now when I look back and connect the dots, that prepared me for the world of podcasts.
[Guest]: So then when podcasts came in, you know, this was a world I was, you know, fairly familiar
[Guest]: with because I had done radio, and I had done this tape mixing and I had done all all of
[Guest]: this stuff.
[Guest]: It was easy for me to sort of pick up and technology only makes it easier, you know,
[Guest]: but you have to have the desire to want to do this, you know, so today every other recipe
[Guest]: is available.
[Guest]: You can learn from, you know, the masters of, you know, you can learn how to chop an
[Guest]: onion from Gordon Ramsay, he actually has a video with 7 million views on how to chop
[Guest]: the onion.
[Guest]: Now, those are things you have to understand that if you are not curious, you will not
[Guest]: try it out.
[Guest]: So that's one part of it.
[Guest]: The second part of it is, I also think that there is one piece nobody talks about, which
[Guest]: is being comfortable creating content in different media formats.
[Guest]: You know, I think it's a very, very useful skill.
[Guest]: The fact that you can do something like this, you can create a podcast, and tell a story
[Guest]: and hold the attention of people for a while.
[Guest]: That's a precious skill to have, you know, and there are people who do it through movies,
[Guest]: there are people who do it through, you know, photos, paintings, whatever.
[Guest]: So I think being able to engage people in a short duration of time and a long format
[Guest]: is a precious skill.
[Guest]: So those are some of the things that I think are going to be important in future.
[Guest]: So besides, of course, what a lot of people have said that, you know, you are curious
[Guest]: about other disciplines, you take a multidisciplinary point of view, you learn about many things,
[Guest]: you try out many things, and even when you are not good at it, you stay at it.
[Guest]: So resilience as a, you know, as a human skill.
[Guest]: And of course, finally, this whole new media that has emerged has changed the world so
[Guest]: drastically.
[Guest]: So putting all of that together is going to be, you know, very important for the future.
[Guest]: So that's my view of what I would focus on.
[Guest]: And perhaps the way that we communicate will become more and more critical and important.
[Guest]: So that's, to me, the way the world will shape up and evolve.
[Amit Varma]: Lovely.
[Amit Varma]: I feel like we have tons to talk about.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if we just barely started, it's horrible this, you can't achieve much in a four-hour
[Guest]: conversation.
[Guest]: No, no, no.
[Guest]: Clearly.
[Guest]: Because I'm used to 24-hour conversations.
[Amit Varma]: There you go.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, yeah, I thought it's a long episode.
[Amit Varma]: I hope Abhijit can manage it.
[Guest]: But you are used to trains.
[Guest]: That is why it is called a suffer.
[Guest]: People suffer together.
[Guest]: Listeners suffer together.
[Amit Varma]: Sir, you, I mean, what can I say, you gave such a pun that, you know, people of my vintage
[Guest]: get these kinds of puns, right?
[Guest]: It's not necessary to be Punjabi.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So my sort of final question for you, therefore, is, and I'll obviously recommend that readers
[Amit Varma]: read all your books, Dreamers and Unicorns was great, made me think about a lot of things
[Amit Varma]: which I'll continue processing in the days to come.
[Amit Varma]: So everyone should absolutely buy that.
[Amit Varma]: But where I'll sort of end by is my traditional question to my guests at the end, that can
[Amit Varma]: you recommend some books, music, movies, anything for my listeners, things that are dear to
[Amit Varma]: you?
[Amit Varma]: Like either things that you feel that, you know, you've got an aha moment from it, or
[Amit Varma]: just things that are dear to you that you want to share with the world?
[Guest]: This is a really tough one.
[Guest]: I think I just, when it comes to books, I have really enjoyed, you know, two people
[Guest]: who influenced me hugely were Satyajit Ray, you know, his body of work.
[Guest]: And by that, I don't necessarily mean only his movies, which a number of people may have
[Guest]: seen.
[Guest]: But if you sort of look at the way he composed music for many of these, you know, he's worked
[Guest]: with Ali Akbar Khan Sahib and Ravi Shankar Sahib, you know, and he's also gone on to
[Guest]: compose his own things.
[Guest]: Really understood Western classical music as much as folk music and, you know, created
[Guest]: his own format, very unique sound.
[Guest]: He created the background score, incredible.
[Guest]: And then he's got his drawings, which I'm a big fan of.
[Guest]: And so, you know, so that's something that I really recommend, that it's really enriched
[Guest]: to have read Ray at different points of time in my life.
[Guest]: I in fact wrote, you know, about Ray in a book about Feluda when he turned 50, Boriya
[Guest]: Majumdar brought out a compilation.
[Guest]: So I got a kind of a worldview and translated Feluda for the benefit of Boriya's readers.
[Guest]: That to me was great fun.
[Guest]: Reading literature in general, whatever language and things, if you can read it in multiple
[Guest]: languages, we've had such a rich variety of writers, you know, from poetry to prose.
[Guest]: So many of them.
[Guest]: You know, I think India's had a very, very rich tradition of storytelling.
[Guest]: So you know, reading any of those people.
[Guest]: So in Hindi, I mean, you know, Premchand was somebody I read a lot of, and I was very,
[Guest]: very impressed with that.
[Guest]: I read a number of people, you know, articles and all of, you know, many of these writers
[Guest]: in Dharmyukh, Saptahik, Hindustan, they used to carry a lot of literary pieces in those
[Guest]: days.
[Guest]: So those are pieces that I think when you read long form, you kind of begin to develop
[Guest]: a different taste and flavor and you get a chance to explore different worlds.
[Guest]: It's really like if you see only an Instagram photograph of my room, you will not know what
[Guest]: I, you know, am like, what is my home like, but it's only when you come in, spend time,
[Guest]: you will sort of discover that.
[Guest]: So that's, these books are available in translations.
[Guest]: So you know, Arunabh Sinha has done a phenomenal job of translating so many of these.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, Sunil Gangopadhyay, like you mentioned, Narayan Nidhidin Rathri, I think he did that
[Guest]: translation.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: Or Nidhidin Rathri.
[Guest]: And, you know, so many of these things are available today for everyone.
[Guest]: And you might say, you know, translation loses the essence.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's okay.
[Guest]: But at least you're reading, you know, 95% of it is right there.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, so that's quite a myth, because it's a different, you know, book.
[Guest]: When you see the book in a movie format, it's different.
[Guest]: When I read Harry Potter, you know, it was very different from when I saw Harry Potter
[Guest]: on screen.
[Guest]: And I said, accha, Harry Potter looks like this, okay, so be it.
[Guest]: It's somebody else's interpretation.
[Guest]: So I think it's all of that.
[Guest]: I kind of, I really read indiscriminately.
[Guest]: So I don't really have a great one or two set of readers.
[Guest]: But I've enjoyed listening to so many of your guests and the work that when you put those,
[Guest]: I get a chance to go and read some of those things.
[Guest]: And that has enriched, you know, whether it is Peggy Mohan's book, which I really enjoyed,
[Guest]: incredible book, or, you know, Manu Pillai, who, you know, opened up a world which I was
[Guest]: not familiar with, you know, all the history of the kings of the south and the southern
[Guest]: states and all that.
[Guest]: I mean, just so fascinating.
[Guest]: So just reading a whole range of things, spending time doing that is one way in which I think
[Guest]: I kind of do that.
[Guest]: As far as music is concerned, you know, I just, I'm a big fan of Indian classical music.
[Guest]: And if that sounds really daunting, then I think, you know, there's got so many formats,
[Guest]: Thumri, Dadra, Khajuri, Chaiti, Ghazal, you know, there's like a whole range of things.
[Guest]: So just enjoying the flavor of it and everything that you read or listen to, you don't have
[Guest]: to be able to understand as long as you appreciate whatever is there.
[Guest]: You know, there are many forms of music I don't quite understand, you know, because
[Guest]: one just hasn't heard it enough.
[Guest]: So I think as you listen to it enough, you develop a taste for it, which is how I learned
[Guest]: how to appreciate Indian classical music.
[Guest]: And every time there's a piece like, for example, you know, rap, I could initially never relate
[Guest]: to rap.
[Guest]: And I always had one complaint.
[Guest]: If you can't put it and you can't play it on a musical instrument, it's not music.
[Guest]: But now when you sort of look at it, and I say, why should I kind of look at that?
[Guest]: It could be a new form is evolving.
[Guest]: And why am I being rigid about the whole thing?
[Guest]: So I think just being open to trying out many different things.
[Guest]: The other day, somebody forwarded Mongolian rock video, and I was quite taken up by that.
[Guest]: So I think as you open, if you don't break the algorithm, you tend to have a world which
[Guest]: is very boring, because it becomes predictable.
[Guest]: And I think the real challenge is to read people in different languages, try translations,
[Guest]: short form, long form poetry.
[Guest]: And if you don't like something, don't give up too easily.
[Guest]: If you persist, then there comes a point of time when you can cycle be when you started
[Guest]: to ride the cycle.
[Guest]: In the initial days, you were wobbling.
[Guest]: And that was a sign that you are going to build up the superpower that okay, now I am
[Guest]: able to balance on two wheels and go anywhere.
[Guest]: So that it's only when you get past that wobbling that you are able to, you know, take it on.
[Guest]: So I would just look at today there is abundance.
[Guest]: Listen to the writers talk about their books, listen to if you can't read, watch them on
[Guest]: YouTube, you know, listen to them on Spotify, they give talks, there are podcasts.
[Guest]: So we are in a world where there's abundance of content.
[Guest]: So just changing different formats, and you suddenly might discover you enjoy listening
[Guest]: to, you know, podcasts more than something else.
[Guest]: And so then you sort of go with that.
[Amit Varma]: Wise words and while you were speaking, I got the title for our episode, Abhijit Bhaduri
[Amit Varma]: breaks the algorithm, which kind of sums up, you know, and it's great advice to young people
[Amit Varma]: also break the algorithm.
[Amit Varma]: So boss, thank you so much for your generosity of being so patient, sharing your insights.
[Amit Varma]: I've, I've had a great time.
[Guest]: Thank you so much for having me.
[Guest]: It's an honor and privilege to, you know, be featured on the podcast where I've heard
[Guest]: some of the most fascinating conversations.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out the show notes, enter rabbit holes
[Amit Varma]: at will.
[Amit Varma]: Do buy Abhijit's books that are listed there.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow him on Twitter at Abhijit Bhaduri, one word.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-E-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: And remember, break the algorithm.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Scene and the Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep
[Amit Varma]: this podcast alive and kicking.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.